CHAPTER V. -- SPECIAL EXPRESSIONS OF ANIMALS.

The Dog, various expressive movements
of--Cats--Horses--Ruminants--Monkeys, their expression of joy and
affection--Of pain--Anger--Astonishment and Terror.


_The Dog_.--I have already described (figs. 5 and 1) the appearance of
a dog approaching another dog with hostile intentions, namely, with
erected ears, eyes intently directed forwards, hair on the neck and back
bristling, gait remarkably stiff, with the tail upright and rigid. So
familiar is this appearance to us, that an angry man is sometimes said
"to have his back up." Of the above points, the stiff gait and upright
tail alone require further discussion. Sir C. Bell remarks[501] that,
when a tiger or wolf is struck by its keeper and is suddenly roused to
ferocity, every muscle is in tension, and the limbs are in an attitude
of strained exertion, prepared to spring. This tension of the muscles
and consequent stiff gait may be accounted for on the principle of
associated habit, for anger has continually led to fierce struggles,
and consequently to all the muscles of the body having been violently
exerted. There is also reason to suspect that the muscular system
requires some short preparation, or some degree of innervation, before
being brought into strong action. My own sensations lead me to this
inference; but I cannot discover that it is a conclusion admitted by
physiologists. Sir J. Paget, however, informs me that when muscles are
suddenly contracted with the greatest force, without any preparation,
they are liable to be ruptured, as when a man slips unexpectedly; but
that this rarely occurs when an action, however violent, is deliberately
performed.

With respect to the upright position of the tail, it seems to depend
(but whether this is really the case I know not) on the elevator muscles
being more powerful than the depressors, so that when all the muscles
of the hinder part of the body are in a state of tension, the tail is
raised. A dog in cheerful spirits, and trotting before his master with
high, elastic steps, generally carries his tail aloft, though it is not
held nearly so stiffly as when he is angered. A horse when first turned
out into an open field, may be seen to trot with long elastic strides,
the head and tail being held high aloft. Even cows when they frisk about
from pleasure, throw up their tails in a ridiculous fashion. So it is
with various animals in the Zoological Gardens. The position of the
tail, however, in certain cases, is determined by special circumstances;
thus as soon as a horse breaks into a gallop, at full speed, he always
lowers his tail, so that as little resistance as possible may be offered
to the air.

When a dog is on the point of springing on his antagonist, he utters a
savage growl; the ears are pressed closely backwards, and the upper lip
(fig. 14) is retracted out of the way of his teeth, especially of his
canines. These movements may be observed with dogs and puppies in
their play. But if a dog gets really savage in his play, his expression
immediately changes. This, however, is simply due to the lips and ears
being drawn back with much greater energy. If a dog only snarls at
another, the lip is generally retracted on one side alone, namely
towards his enemy.

[Illustration: Head of snarling Dog. Fig 14]

{illust. caption = FIG. 14.--Head of snarling Dog. From life, by Mr.
Wood.

The movements of a dog whilst exhibiting affection towards his master
were described (figs. 6 and 8) in our second chapter. These consist
in the head and whole body being lowered and thrown into flexuous
movements, with the tail extended and wagged from side to side. The ears
fall down and are drawn somewhat backwards, which causes the eyelids to
be elongated, and alters the whole appearance of the face. The lips hang
loosely, and the hair remains smooth. All these movements or gestures
are explicable, as I believe, from their standing in complete antithesis
to those naturally assumed by a savage dog under a directly opposite
state of mind. When a man merely speaks to, or just notices, his dog, we
see the last vestige of these movements in a slight wag of the tail,
without any other movement of the body, and without even the ears being
lowered. Dogs also exhibit their affection by desiring to rub against
their masters, and to be rubbed or patted by them. Gratiolet explains
the above gestures of affection in the following manner: and the reader
can judge whether the explanation appears satisfactory. Speaking of
animals in general, including the dog, he says,[502] "C'est toujours la
partie la plus sensible de leurs corps qui recherche les caresses ou les
donne. Lorsque toute la longueur des flancs et du corps est sensible,
l'animal serpente et rampe sous les caresses; et ces ondulations se
propageant le long des muscles analogues des segments jusqu'aux
extremites de la colonne vertebrale, la queue se ploie et s'agite."
Further on, he adds, that dogs, when feeling affectionate, lower their
ears in order to exclude all sounds, so that their whole attention may
be concentrated on the caresses of their master! Dogs have another and
striking way of exhibiting their affection, namely, by licking the hands
or faces of their masters. They sometimes lick other dogs, and then it
is always their chops. I have also seen dogs licking cats with whom they
were friends. This habit probably originated in the females carefully
licking their puppies--the dearest object of their love--for the sake of
cleansing them. They also often give their puppies, after a short
absence, a few cursory licks, apparently from affection. Thus the habit
will have become associated with the emotion of love, however it may
afterwards be aroused. It is now so firmly inherited or innate, That it
is transmitted equally to both sexes. A female terrier of mine lately
had her puppies destroyed, and though at all times a very affectionate
creature, I was much struck with the manner in which she then tried to
satisfy her instinctive maternal love by expending it on me; and her
desire to lick my hands rose to an insatiable passion.

The same principle probably explains why dogs, when feeling
affectionate, like rubbing against their masters and being rubbed or
patted by them, for from the nursing of their puppies, contact with
a beloved object has become firmly associated in their minds with the
emotion of love. The feeling of affection of a dog towards his master is
combined with a strong sense of submission, which is akin to fear. Hence
dogs not only lower their bodies and crouch a little as they approach
their masters, but sometimes throw themselves on the ground with
their bellies upwards. This is a movement as completely opposite as is
possible to any show of resistance. I formerly possessed a large dog
who was not at all afraid to fight with other dogs; but a wolf-like
shepherd-dog in the neighbourhood, though not ferocious and not so
powerful as my dog, had a strange influence over him. When they met on
the road, my dog used to run to meet him, with his tail partly tucked in
between his legs and hair not erected; and then he would throw himself
on the ground, belly upwards. By this action he seemed to say more
plainly than by words, "Behold, I am your slave." A pleasurable and
excited state of mind, associated with affection, is exhibited by some
dogs in a very peculiar manner, namely, by grinning. This was noticed
long ago by Somerville, who says, And with a courtly grin, the fawning
bound Salutes thee cow'ring, his wide op'ning nose Upward he curls, and
his large sloe-back eyes Melt in soft blandishments, and humble joy.'
_The Chase_, book i. Sir W. Scott's famous Scotch greyhound, Maida, had
this habit, and it is common with terriers. I have also seen it in a
Spitz and in a sheep-dog. Mr. Riviere, who has particularly attended
to this expression, informs me that it is rarely displayed in a perfect
manner, but is quite common in a lesser degree. The upper lip during the
act of grinning is retracted, as in snarling, so that the canines are
exposed, and the ears are drawn backwards; but the general appearance
of the animal clearly shows that anger is not felt. Sir C. Bell[503]
remarks "Dogs, in their expression of fondness, have a slight eversion
of the lips, and grin and sniff amidst their gambols, in a way that
resembles laughter." Some persons speak of the grin as a smile, but
if it had been really a smile, we should see a similar, though more
pronounced, movement of the lips and ears, when dogs utter their bark
of joy; but this is not the case, although a bark of joy often follows
a grin. On the other hand, dogs, when playing with their comrades
or masters, almost always pretend to bite each other; and they then
retract, though not energetically, their lips and ears. Hence I suspect
that there is a tendency in some dogs, whenever they feel lively
pleasure combined with affection, to act through habit and association
on the same muscles, as in playfully biting each other, or their
masters' hands. I have described, in the second chapter, the gait and
appearance of a dog when cheerful, and the marked antithesis presented
by the same animal when dejected and disappointed, with his head, ears,
body, tail, and chops drooping, and eyes dull. Under the expectation of
any great pleasure, dogs bound and jump about in an extravagant manner,
and bark for joy. The tendency to bark under this state of mind is
inherited, or runs in the breed: greyhounds rarely bark, whilst the
Spitz-dog barks so incessantly on starting for a walk with his master
that he becomes a nuisance.

An agony of pain is expressed by dogs in nearly the same way as by many
other animals, namely, by howling writhing, and contortions of the
whole body. Attention is shown by the head being raised, with the ears
erected, and eyes intently directed towards the object or quarter under
observation. If it be a sound and the source is not known, the head is
often turned obliquely from side to side in a most significant manner,
apparently in order to judge with more exactness from what point the
sound proceeds. But I have seen a dog greatly surprised at a new noise,
turning, his head to one side through habit, though he clearly perceived
the source of the noise. Dogs, as formerly remarked, when their
attention is in any way aroused, whilst watching some object, or
attending to some sound, often lift up one paw (fig. 4) and keep it
doubled up, as if to make a slow and stealthy approach. A dog under
extreme terror will throw himself down, howl, and void his excretions;
but the hair, I believe, does not become erect unless some anger is
felt. I have seen a dog much terrified at a band of musicians who
were playing loudly outside the house, with every muscle of his body
trembling, with his heart palpitating so quickly that the beats could
hardly be counted, and panting for breath with widely open mouth, in
the same manner as a terrified man does. Yet this dog had not exerted
himself; he had only wandered slowly and restlessly about the room, and
the day was cold. Even a very slight degree of fear is invariably shown
by the tail being tucked in between the legs. This tucking in of the
fail is accompanied by the ears being drawn backwards; but they are not
pressed closely to the head,nas in snarling, and they are not lowered,
as when a dog is pleased or affectionate. When two young dogs chase
each other in play, the one that runs away always keeps his tail tucked
inwards. So it is when a dog, in the highest spirits, careers like a mad
creature round and round his master in circles, or in figures of eight.
He then acts as if another dog were chasing him. This curious kind of
play, which must be familiar to every one who has attended to dogs,
is particularly apt to be excited, after the animal has been a little
startled or frightened, as by his master suddenly jumping out on him in
the dusk. In this case, as well as when two young dogs are chasing each
other in play, it appears as if the one that runs away was afraid of the
other catching him by the tail; but as far as I can find out, dogs very
rarely catch each other in this manner. I asked a gentleman, who
had kept foxhounds all his life, and be applied to other experienced
sportsmen, whether they had ever seen hounds thus seize a fox; but they
never had. It appears that when a dog is chased, or when in danger of
being struck behind, or of anything falling on him, in all these cases
he wishes to withdraw as quickly as possible his whole hind-quarters,
and that from some sympathy or connection between the muscles, the tail
is then drawn closely inwards. A similarly connected movement between
the hind-quarters and the tail may be observed in the hyaena. Mr.
Bartlett informs me that when two of these animals fight together, they
are mutually conscious of the wonderful power of each other's jaws, and
are extremely cautious. They well know that if one of their legs were
seized, the bone would instantly be crushed into atoms; hence they
approach each other kneeling, with their legs turned as much as possible
inwards, and with their whole bodies bowed, so as not to present any
salient point; the tail at the same time being closely tucked in between
the legs. In this attitude they approach each other sideways, or even
partly backwards. So again with deer, several of the species, when
savage and fighting, tuck in their tails. When one horse in a field
tries to bite the hind-quarters of another in play, or when a rough boy
strikes a donkey from behind, the hind-quarters and the tail are drawn
in, though it does not appear as if this were done merely to save
the tail from being injured. We have also seen the reverse of these
movements; for when an animal trots with high elastic steps, the tail
is almost always carried aloft. As I have said, when a dog is chased and
runs away, he keeps his ears directed backwards but still open; and this
is clearly done for the sake of hearing the footsteps of his pursuer.
From habit the ears are often held in this same position, and the tail
tucked in, when the danger is obviously in front. I have repeatedly
noticed, with a timid terrier of mine, that when she is afraid of some
object in front, the nature of which she perfectly knows and does not
need to reconnoitre, yet she will for a long time hold her ears and tail
in this position, looking the image of discomfort. Discomfort, without
any fear, is similarly expressed: thus, one day I went out of doors,
just at the time when this same dog knew that her dinner would be
brought. I did not call her, but she wished much to accompany me, and at
the same time she wished much for her dinner; and there she stood, first
looking one way and then the other, with her tail tucked in and
ears drawn back, presenting an unmistakable appearance of perplexed
discomfort. Almost all the expressive movements now described, with the
exception of the grinning from joy, are innate or instinctive, for they
are common to all the individuals, young and old, of all the breeds.
Most of them are likewise common to the aboriginal parents of the dog,
namely the wolf and jackal; and some of them to other species of the
same group. Tamed wolves and jackals, when caressed by their masters,
jump about for joy, wag their tails, lower their ears, lick their
master's hands, crouch down, and even throw themselves on the ground
belly upwards.[504] I have seen a rather fox-like African jackal, from
the Gaboon, depress its ears when caressed. Wolves and jackals, when
frightened, certainly tuck in their tails; and a tamed jackal has been
described as careering round his master in circles and figures of eight,
like a dog, with his tail between his legs. It has been stated[505]
that foxes, however tame, never display any of the above expressive
movements; but this is not strictly accurate. Many years ago I observed
in the Zoological Gardens, and recorded the fact at the time, that a
very tame English fox, When caressed by the keeper, wagged its tail,
depressed its ears, and then threw itself on the ground, belly upwards.
The black fox of North America likewise depressed its ears in a slight
degree. But I believe that foxes never lick the hands of their masters,
and I have been assured that when frightened they never tuck in their
tails. If the explanation which I have given of the expression of
affection in dogs be admitted, then it would appear that animals
which have never been domesticated--namely wolves, jackals, and even
foxes--have nevertheless acquired, through the principle of antithesis,
certain expressive gestures; for it is Dot probable that these animals,
confined in cages, should have learnt them by imitating dogs.

_Cats_.--I have already described the actions of a cat (fig. 9), when
feeling savage and not terrified. She assumes a crouching attitude and
occasionally protrudes her fore-feet, with the claws exserted ready
for striking. The tail is extended, being curled or lashed from side to
side. The hair is not erected--at least it was not so in the few cases
observed by me. The ears are drawn closely backwards and the teeth are
shown. Low savage growls are uttered. We can understand why the attitude
assumed by a cat when preparing to fight with another cat, or in any way
greatly irritated, is so widely different from that of a dog approaching
another dog with hostile intentions; for the cat uses her fore-feet for
striking, and this renders a crouching position convenient or necessary.
She is also much more accustomed than a dog to lie concealed and
suddenly spring on her prey. No cause can be assigned with certainty for
the tail being lashed or curled from side to side. This habit is common
to many other animals--for instance, to the puma, when prepared to
spring;[506] but it is not common to dogs, or to foxes, as I infer from
Mr. St. John's account of a fox lying in wait and seizing a hare. We
have already seen that some kinds of lizards and various snakes, when
excited, rapidly vibrate the tips of their tails. It would appear as
if, under strong excitement, there existed an uncontrollable desire for
movement of some kind, owing to nerve-force being freely liberated from
the excited sensorium; and that as the tail is left free, and as its
movement does not disturb the general position of the body, it is curled
or lashed about.

All the movements of a cat, when feeling affectionate, are in complete
antithesis to those just described. She now stands upright, with
slightly arched back, tail perpendicularly raised, and ears erected;
and she rubs her cheeks and flanks against her master or mistress. The
desire to rub something is so strong in cats under this state of mind,
that they may often be seen rubbing themselves against the legs of
chairs or tables, or against door-posts. This manner of expressing
affection probably originated through association, as in the case of
dogs, from the mother nursing and fondling her young; and perhaps from
the young themselves loving each other and playing together. Another
and very different gesture, expressive of pleasure, has already been
described, namely, the curious manner in which young and even old cats,
when pleased, alternately protrude their fore-feet, with separated toes,
as if pushing against and sucking their mother's teats. This habit is so
far analogous to that of rubbing against something, that both apparently
are derived from actions performed during the nursing period. Why cats
should show affection by rubbing so much more than do dogs, though
the latter delight in contact with their masters, and why cats only
occasionally lick the hands of their friends, whilst dogs always do so,
I cannot say. Cats cleanse themselves by licking their own coats more
regularly than do dogs. On the other hand, their tongues seem less well
fitted for the work than the longer and more flexible tongues of dogs.

[Illustration: Cat terrified at a dog.  Fig.15]

Cats, when terrified, stand at full height, and arch their backs in a
well-known and ridiculous fashion. They spit, hiss, or growl. The hair
over the whole body, and especially on the tail, becomes erect. In the
instances observed by me the basal part of the tail was held upright,
the terminal part being thrown on one side; but sometimes the tail (see
fig. 15) is only a little raised, and is bent almost from the base
to one side. The ears are drawn back, and the teeth exposed. When two
kittens are playing together, the one often thus tries to frighten the
other. From what we have seen in former chapters, all the above points
of expression are intelligible, except the extreme arching of the back.
I am inclined to believe that, in the same manner as many birds, whilst
they ruffle their feathers, spread out their wings and tail, to make
themselves look as big as possible, so cats stand upright at their full
height, arch their backs, often raise the basal part of the tail, and
erect their hair, for the same purpose. The lynx, when attacked, is said
to arch its back, and is thus figured by Brehm. But the keepers in the
Zoological Gardens have never seen any tendency to this action in the
larger feline animals, such as tigers, lions, &c.; and these have little
cause to be afraid of any other animal.

Cats use their voices much as a means of expression, and they utter,
under various emotions and desires, at least six or seven different
sounds. The purr of satisfaction, which is made during both inspiration
and expiration, is one of the most curious. The puma, cheetah, and
ocelot likewise purr; but the tiger, when pleased, "emits a peculiar
short snuffle, accompanied by the closure of the eyelids."[507] It is
said that the lion, jaguar, and leopard, do not purr.


_Horses_.--Horses when savage draw their ears closely back, protrude
their heads, and partially uncover their incisor teeth, ready for
biting. When inclined to kick behind, they generally, through habit,
draw back their ears; and their eyes are turned backwards in a peculiar
manner.[508] When pleased, as when some coveted food is brought to them
in the stable, they raise and draw in their heads, prick their ears,
and looking intently towards their friend, often whinny. Impatience is
expressed by pawing the ground.

The actions of a horse when much startled are highly expressive. One
day my horse was much frightened at a drilling machine, covered by a
tarpaulin, and lying on an open field. He raised his head so high, that
his neck became almost perpendicular; and this he did from habit, for
the machine lay on a slope below, and could not have been seen with
more distinctness through the raising of the head; nor if any sound had
proceeded from it, could the sound have been more distinctly heard. His
eyes and ears were directed intently forwards; and I could feel through
the saddle the palpitations of his heart. With red dilated nostrils he
snorted violently, and whirling round, would have dashed off at full
speed, had I not prevented him. The distension of the nostrils is not
for the sake of scenting the source of danger, for when a horse smells
carefully at any object and is not alarmed, he does not dilate his
nostrils. Owing to the presence of a valve in the throat, a horse
when panting does not breathe through his open mouth, but through his
nostrils; and these consequently have become endowed with great powers
of expansion. This expansion of the nostrils, as well as the snorting,
and the palpitations of the heart, are actions which have become firmly
associated during a long series of generations with the emotion of
terror; for terror has habitually led the horse to the most violent
exertion in dashing away at full speed from the cause of danger.


_Ruminants_.--Cattle and sheep are remarkable from displaying in so
slight a degree their emotions or sensations, excepting that of extreme
pain. A bull when enraged exhibits his rage only by the manner in which
he holds his lowered head, with distended nostrils, and by bellowing. He
also often paws the ground; but this pawing seems quite different from
that of an impatient horse, for when the soil is loose, he throws up
clouds of dust. I believe that bulls act in this manner when irritated
by flies, for the sake of driving them away. The wilder breeds of sheep
and the chamois when startled stamp on the ground, and whistle through
their noses; and this serves as a danger-signal to their comrades. The
musk-ox of the Arctic regions, when encountered, likewise stamps on the
ground.[509] How this stamping action arose I cannot conjecture; for
from inquiries which I have made it does not appear that any of these
animals fight with their fore-legs.

Some species of deer, when savage, display far more expression than do
cattle, sheep, or goats, for, as has already been stated, they draw back
their ears, grind their teeth, erect their hair, squeal, stamp on the
ground, and brandish their horns. One day in the Zoological Gardens, the
Formosan deer (_Cervus pseudaxis_) approached me in a curious attitude,
with his muzzle raised high up, so that the horns were pressed back on
his neck; the head being held rather obliquely. From the expression of
his eye I felt sure that he was savage; he approached slowly, and as
soon as he came close to the iron bars, he did not lower his head to
butt at me, but suddenly bent it inwards, and struck his horns with
great force against the railings. Mr. Bartlett informs me that some
other species of deer place themselves in the same attitude when
enraged.

_Monkeys_.--The various species and genera of monkeys express their
feelings in many different ways; and this fact is interesting, as in
some degree bearing on the question, whether the so-called races of man
should be ranked as distinct species or varieties; for, as we shall
see in the following chapters, the different races of man express their
emotions and sensations with remarkable uniformity throughout the world.
Some of the expressive actions of monkeys are interesting in another
way, namely from being closely analogous to those of man. As I have
had no opportunity of observing any one species of the group under all
circumstances, my miscellaneous remarks will be best arranged under
different states of the mind.

_Pleasure, joy, affection_--It is not possible to distinguish in
monkeys, at least without more experience than I have had, the
expression of pleasure or joy from that of affection. Young chimpanzees
make a kind of barking noise, when pleased by the return of any one to
whom they are attached. When this noise, which the keepers call a laugh,
is uttered, the lips are protruded; but so they are under various other
emotions. Nevertheless I could perceive that when they were pleased
the form of the lips differed a little from that assumed when they
were angered. If a young chimpanzee be tickled--and the armpits are
particularly sensitive to tickling, as in the case of our children,--a
more decided chuckling or laughing sound is uttered; though the
laughter is sometimes noiseless. The corners of the mouth are then drawn
backwards; and this sometimes causes the lower eyelids to be slightly
wrinkled. But this wrinkling, which is so characteristic of our own
laughter, is more plainly seen in some other monkeys. The teeth in
the upper jaw in the chimpanzee are not exposed when they utter their
laughing noise, in which respect they differ from us. But their
eyes sparkle and grow brighter, as Mr. W. L. Martin,[510] who has
particularly attended to their expression, states.

Young Orangs, when tickled, likewise grin and make a chuckling sound;
and Mr. Martin says that their eyes grow brighter. As soon as their
laughter ceases, an expression may be detected passing over their faces,
which, as Mr. Wallace remarked to me, may be called a smile. I have
also noticed something of the same kind with the chimpanzee. Dr.
Duchenne--and I cannot quote a better authority--informs me that he kept
a very tame monkey in his house for a year; and when he gave it during
meal-times some choice delicacy, he observed that the corners of
its mouth were slightly raised; thus an expression of satisfaction,
partaking of the nature of an incipient smile, and resembling that often
seen on the face of main, could be plainly perceived in this animal.

The _Cebus azarae_,[511] when rejoiced at again seeing a beloved person,
utters a peculiar tittering (_kichernden_) sound. It also expresses
agreeable sensations, by drawing back the corners of its mouth, without
producing any sound. Rengger calls this movement laughter, but it would
be more appropriately called a smile. The form of the mouth is different
when either pain or terror is expressed, and high shrieks are uttered.
Another species of _Cebus_ in the Zoological Gardens (_C. hypoleucus_)
when pleased, makes a reiterated shrill note, and likewise draws back
the corners of its mouth, apparently through the contraction of the same
muscles as with us. So does the Barbary ape (_Inuus ecaudatus_) to an
extraordinary degree; and I observed in this monkey that the skin of
the lower eyelids then became much wrinkled. At the same time it rapidly
moved its lower jaw or lips in a spasmodic manner, the teeth being
exposed; but the noise produced was hardly more distinct than that which
we sometimes call silent laughter. Two of the keepers affirmed that this
slight sound was the animal's laughter, and when I expressed some doubt
on this head (being at the time quite inexperienced), they made it
attack or rather threaten a hated Entellus monkey, living in the same
compartment. Instantly the whole expression of the face of the Inuus
changed; the mouth was opened much more widely, the canine teeth were
more fully exposed, and a hoarse barking noise was uttered.

The Anubis baboon (_Cynocephalus anubis_) was first insulted and put
into a furious rage, as was easily done, by his keeper, who then made
friends with him and shook hands. As the reconciliation was effected the
baboon rapidly moved up and down his jaws and lips, and looked pleased.
When we laugh heartily, a similar movement, or quiver, may be observed
more or less distinctly in our jaws; but with man the muscles of the
chest are more particularly acted on, whilst with this baboon, and with
some other monkeys, it is the muscles of the jaws and lips which are
spasmodically affected.

[Illustration: Cynopithecus niger, in a placid condition. Fig.16]

[Illustration: Cynopithecus niger, pleased by being caressed. Fig.17]

I have already had occasion to remark on the curious manner in which
two or three species of Alacacus and the _Cynopithecus niger_ draw back
their ears and utter a slight jabbering noise, when they are pleased
by being caressed. With the Cynopithecus (fig. 17), the corners of the
mouth are at the same time drawn backwards and upwards, so that the
teeth are exposed. Hence this expression would never be recognized by a
stranger as one of pleasure. The crest of long hairs on the forehead is
depressed, and apparently the whole skin of the head drawn backwards.
The eyebrows are thus raised a little, and the eyes assume a staring
appearance. The lower eyelids also become slightly wrinkled; but this
wrinkling is not conspicuous, owing to the permanent transverse furrows
on the face.

_Painful emotions and sensations_.--With monkeys the expression of
slight pain, or of any painful emotion, such as grief, vexation,
jealousy, &c., is not easily distinguished from that of moderate anger;
and these states of mind readily and quickly pass into each other.
Grief, however, with some species is certainly exhibited by weeping.
A woman, who sold a monkey to the Zoological Society, believed to have
come from Borneo (_Macacus maurus_ or _M. inornatus_ of Gray), said that
it often cried; and Mr. Bartlett, as well as the keeper Mr. Sutton, have
repeatedly seen it, when grieved, or even when much pitied, weeping
so copiously that the tears rolled down its cheeks. There is, however,
something strange about this case, for two specimens subsequently kept
in the Gardens, and believed to be the same species, have never been
seen to weep, though they were carefully observed by the keeper and
myself when much distressed and loudly screaming. Rengger states[512]
that the eyes of the _Cebus azarae_ fill with tears, but not
sufficiently to overflow, when it is prevented getting some much desired
object, or is much frightened. Humboldt also asserts that the eyes of
the _Callithrix sciureus_ "instantly fill with tears when it is seized
with fear;" but when this pretty little monkey in the Zoological Gardens
was teased, so as to cry out loudly, this did not occur. I do not,
however, wish to throw the least doubt on the accuracy of Humboldt's
statement.

The appearance of dejection in young orangs and chimpanzees, when out
of health, is as plain and almost as pathetic as in the case of our
children. This state of mind and body is shown by their listless
movements, fallen countenances, dull eyes, and changed complexion.

_Anger_.--This emotion is often exhibited by many kinds of monkeys, and
is expressed, as Mr. Martin remarks,[513] in many different ways. "Some
species, when irritated, pout the lips, gaze with a fixed and savage
glare on their foe, and make repeated short starts as if about to spring
forward, uttering at the same time inward guttural sounds. Many display
their anger by suddenly advancing, making abrupt starts, at the same
time opening the mouth and pursing up the lips, so as to conceal the
teeth, while the eyes are daringly fixed on the enemy, as if in savage
defiance. Some again, and principally the long-tailed monkeys, or
Guenons, display their teeth, and accompany their malicious grins with
a sharp, abrupt, reiterated cry." Mr. Sutton confirms the statement that
some species uncover their teeth when enraged, whilst others conceal
them by the protrusion of their lips; and some kinds draw back their
ears. The _Cynopithecus niger_, lately referred to, acts in this manner,
at the same time depressing the crest of hair on its forehead, and
showing its teeth; so that the movements of the features from anger are
nearly the same as those from pleasure; and the two expressions can be
distinguished only by those familiar with the animal.

Baboons often show their passion and threaten their enemies in a very
odd manner, namely, by opening their mouths widely as in the act of
yawning. Mr. Bartlett has often seen two baboons, when first placed
in the same compartment, sitting opposite to each other and thus
alternately opening their mouths; and this action seems frequently to
end in a real yawn. Mr. Bartlett believes that both animals wish to show
to each other that they are provided with a formidable set of teeth, as
is undoubtedly the case. As I could hardly credit the reality of this
yawning gesture, Mr. Bartlett insulted an old baboon and put him into a
violent passion; and he almost immediately thus acted. Some species of
Macacus and of Cereopithecus[514] behave in the same manner. Baboons
likewise show their anger, as was observed by Brehin with those which
he kept alive in Abyssinia, in another manner, namely, by striking the
ground with one hand, "like an angry man striking the table with his
fist." I have seen this movement with the baboons in the Zoological
Gardens; but sometimes the action seems rather to represent the
searching for a stone or other object in their beds of straw.

Mr. Sutton has often observed the face of the _Macacus rhesus_, when
much enraged, growing red. As he was mentioning this to me, another
monkey attacked a _rhesus_, and I saw its face redden as plainly as that
of a man in a violent passion. In the course of a few minutes, after the
battle, the face of this monkey recovered its natural tint. At the same
time that the face reddened, the naked posterior part of the body, which
is always red, seemed to grow still redder; but I cannot positively
assert that this was the case. When the Mandrill is in any way excited,
the brilliantly coloured, naked parts of the skin are said to become
still more vividly coloured.

With several species of baboons the ridge of the forehead projects much
over the eyes, and is studded with a few long hairs, representing our
eyebrows. These animals are always looking about them, and in order
to look upwards they raise their eyebrows. They have thus, as it would
appear, acquired the habit of frequently moving their eyebrows. However
this may be, many kinds of monkeys, especially the baboons, when angered
or in any way excited, rapidly and incessantly move their eyebrows
up and down, as well as the hairy skin of their foreheads.[515] As we
associate in the case of man the raising and lowering of the eyebrows
with definite states of the mind, the almost incessant movement of the
eyebrows by monkeys gives them a senseless expression. I once observed
a man who had a trick of continually raising his eyebrows without any
corresponding emotion, and this gave to him a foolish appearance; so it
is with some persons who keep the corners of their mouths a little drawn
backwards and upwards, as if by an incipient smile, though at the time
they are not amused or pleased.

A young orang, made jealous by her keeper attending to another monkey,
slightly uncovered her teeth, and, uttering a peevish noise like
_tish-shist_, turned her back on him. Both orangs and chimpanzees, when
a little more angered, protrude their lips greatly, and make a harsh
barking noise. A young female chimpanzee, in a violent passion,
presented a curious resemblance to a child in the same state. She
screamed loudly with widely open mouth, the lips being retracted so that
the teeth were fully exposed. She threw her arms wildly about, sometimes
clasping them over her head. She rolled on the ground, sometimes on her
back, sometimes on her belly, and bit everything within reach. A young
gibbon (_Hylobates syndactylus_) in a passion has been described[516] as
behaving in almost exactly the same manner.

The lips of young orangs and chimpanzees are protruded, sometimes to a
wonderful degree, under various circumstances. They act thus, not only
when slightly angered, sulky, or disappointed, but when alarmed at
anything--in one instance, at the sight of a turtle,[517]--and likewise
when pleased. But neither the degree of protrusion nor the shape of the
mouth is exactly the same, as I believe, in all cases; and the
sounds which are then uttered are different. The accompanying drawing
represents a chimpanzee made sulky by an orange having been offered him,
and then taken away. A similar protrusion or pouting of the lips, though
to a much slighter degree, may be seen in sulky children.

[Illustration: Chimpanzee disappointed and sulky. Fig. 18]

Many years ago, in the Zoological Gardens, I placed a looking-glass
on the floor before two young orangs, who, as far as it was known, had
never before seen one. At first they gazed at their own images with the
most steady surprise, and often changed their point of view. They then
approached close and protruded their lips towards the image, as if to
kiss it, in exactly the same manner as they had previously done towards
each other, when first placed, a few days before, in the same room. They
next made all sorts of grimaces, and put themselves in various attitudes
before the mirror; they pressed and rubbed the surface; they placed
their hands at different distances behind it; looked behind it; and
finally seemed almost frightened, started a little, became cross, and
refused to look any longer.

When we try to perform some little action which is difficult and
requires precision, for instance, to thread a needle, we generally
close our lips firmly, for the sake, I presume, of not disturbing our
movements by breathing; and I noticed the same action in a young Orang.
The poor little creature was sick, and was amusing itself by trying to
kill the flies on the window-panes with its knuckles; this was difficult
as the flies buzzed about, and at each attempt the lips were firmly
compressed, and at the same time slightly protruded.

Although the countenances, and more especially the gestures, of orangs
and chimpanzees are in some respects highly expressive, I doubt whether
on the whole they are so expressive as those of some other kinds of
monkeys. This may be attributed in part to their ears being immovable,
and in part to the nakedness of their eyebrows, of which the movements
are thus rendered less conspicuous. When, however, they raise their
eyebrows their foreheads become, as with us, transversely wrinkled.
In comparison with man, their faces are inexpressive, chiefly owing to
their not frowning under any emotion of the mind--that is, as far as
I have been able to observe, and I carefully attended to this point.
Frowning, which is one of the most important of all the expressions in
man, is due to the contraction of the corrugators by which the eyebrows
are lowered and brought together, so that vertical furrows are formed
on the forehead. Both the orang and chimpanzee are said[518] to possess
this muscle, but it seems rarely brought into action, at least in a
conspicuous manner. I made my hands into a sort of cage, and placing
some tempting fruit within, allowed both a young orang and chimpanzee
to try their utmost to get it out; but although they grew rather cross,
they showed not a trace of a frown. Nor was there any frown when they
were enraged. Twice I took two chimpanzees from their rather dark room
suddenly into bright sunshine, which would certainly have caused us to
frown; they blinked and winked their eyes, but only once did I see
a very slight frown. On another occasion, I tickled the nose of a
chimpanzee with a straw, and as it crumpled up its face, slight vertical
furrows appeared between the eyebrows. I have never seen a frown on the
forehead of the orang.

The gorilla, when enraged, is described as erecting its crest of
hair, throwing down its under lip, dilating its nostrils, and uttering
terrific yells. Messrs. Savage and Wyman[519] state that the scalp can
be freely moved backwards and forwards, and that when the animal is
excited it is strongly contracted; but I presume that they mean by this
latter expression that the scalp is lowered; for they likewise speak of
the young chimpanzee, when crying out, as having the eyebrows strongly
contracted. The great power of movement in the scalp of the gorilla, of
many baboons and other monkeys, deserves notice in relation to the power
possessed by some few men, either through reversion or persistence, of
voluntarily moving their scalps.[520]

_Astonishment, Terror_--A living fresh-water turtle was placed at my
request in the same compartment in the Zoological Gardens with many
monkeys; and they showed unbounded astonishment, as well as some fear.
This was displayed by their remaining motionless, staring intently with
widely opened eyes, their eyebrows being often moved up and down. Their
faces seemed somewhat lengthened. They occasionally raised themselves
on their hind-legs to get abetter view. They often retreated a few feet,
and then turning their heads over one shoulder, again stared intently.
It was curious to observe how much less afraid they were of the
turtle than of a living snake which I had formerly placed in their
compartment;[521] for in the course of a few minutes some of the monkeys
ventured to approach and touch the turtle. On the other hand, some of
the larger baboons were greatly terrified, and grinned as if on the
point of screaming out. When I showed a little dressed-up doll to the
_Cynopithecus niger_, it stood motionless, stared intently with widely
opened eyes, and advanced its ears a little forwards. But when the
turtle was placed in its compartment, this monkey also moved its lips in
an odd, rapid, jabbering manner, which the keeper declared was meant to
conciliate or please the turtle.

I was never able clearly to perceive that the eyebrows of astonished
monkeys were kept permanently raised, though they were frequently moved
up and down. Attention, which precedes astonishment, is expressed by man
by a slight raising of the eyebrows; and Dr. Duchenne informs me that
when he gave to the monkey formerly mentioned some quite new article of
food, it elevated its eyebrows a little, thus assuming an appearance of
close attention. It then took the food in its fingers, and, with
lowered or rectilinear eyebrows, scratched, smelt, and examined it,--an
expression of reflection being thus exhibited. Sometimes it would
throw back its head a little, and again with suddenly raised eyebrows
re-examine and finally taste the food.

In no case did any monkey keep its mouth open when it was astonished.
Mr. Sutton observed for me a young orang and chimpanzee during a
considerable length of time; and however much they were astonished, or
whilst listening intently to some strange sound, they did not keep
their mouths open. This fact is surprising, as with mankind hardly any
expression is more general than a widely open mouth under the sense of
astonishment. As far as I have been able to observe, monkeys breathe
more freely through their nostrils than men do; and this may account
for their not opening their mouths when they are astonished; for, as we
shall see in a future chapter, man apparently acts in this manner when
startled, at first for the sake of quickly drawing a full inspiration,
and afterwards for the sake of breathing as quietly as possible.

Terror is expressed by many kinds of monkeys by the utterance of shrill
screams; the lips being drawn back, so that the teeth are exposed. The
hair becomes erect, especially when some anger is likewise felt. Mr.
Sutton has distinctly seen the face of the _Macacus rhesus_ grow pale
from fear. Monkeys also tremble from fear; and sometimes they void their
excretions. I have seen one which, when caught, almost fainted from an
excess of terror.

Sufficient facts have now been given with respect to the expressions
of various animals. It is impossible to agree with Sir C. Bell when he
says[522] that "the faces of animals seem chiefly capable of expressing
rage and fear;" and again, when he says that all their expressions
"may be referred, more or less plainly, to their acts of volition or
necessary instincts." He who will look at a dog preparing to attack
another dog or a man, and at the same animal when caressing his master,
or will watch the countenance of a monkey when insulted, and when
fondled by his keeper, will be forced to admit that the movements of
their features and their gestures are almost as expressive as those of
man. Although no explanation can be given of some of the expressions in
the lower animals, the greater number are explicable in accordance with
the three principles given at the commencement of the first chapter.

