CHAPTER IV. -- MEANS OF EXPRESSION IN ANIMALS.

The emission of Sounds--Vocal sounds--Sounds otherwise
produced--Erection of the dermal appendages, hairs, feathers, &c., under
the emotions of anger and terror--The drawing back of the ears as a
preparation for fighting, and as an expression of anger--Erection of the
ears and raising the head, a sign of attention.


IN this and the following chapter I will describe, but only in
sufficient detail to illustrate my subject, the expressive movements,
under different states of the mind, of some few well-known animals. But
before considering them in due succession, it will save much useless
repetition to discuss certain means of expression common to most of
them.

_The emission of Sounds_.--With many kinds of animals, man included,
the vocal organs are efficient in the highest degree as a means of
expression. We have seen, in the last chapter, that when the sensorium
is strongly excited, the muscles of the body are generally thrown into
violent action; and as a consequence, loud sounds are uttered, however
silent the animal may generally be, and although the sounds may be of no
use. Hares and rabbits for instance, never, I believe, use their vocal
organs except in the extremity of suffering; as, when a wounded hare is
killed by the sportsman, or when a young rabbit is caught by a stoat.
Cattle and horses suffer great pain in silence; but when this is
excessive, and especially when associated with terror, they utter
fearful sounds. I have often recognized, from a distance on the Pampas,
the agonized death-bellow of the cattle, when caught by the lasso and
hamstrung. It is said that horses, when attacked by wolves, utter loud
and peculiar screams of distress.

Involuntary and purposeless contractions of the muscles of the chest and
glottis, excited in the above manner, may have first given rise to the
emission of vocal sounds. But the voice is now largely used by many
animals for various purposes; and habit seems to have played an
important part in its employment under other circumstances. Naturalists
have remarked, I believe with truth, that social animals, from
habitually using their vocal organs as a means of intercommunication,
use them on other occasions much more freely than other animals. But
there are marked exceptions to this rule, for instance, with the rabbit.
The principle, also, of association, which is so widely extended in its
power, has likewise played its part. Hence it follows that the voice,
from having been habitually employed as a serviceable aid under certain
conditions, inducing pleasure, pain, rage, &c., is commonly used
whenever the same sensations or emotions are excited, under quite
different conditions, or in a lesser degree.

The sexes of many animals incessantly call for each other during the
breeding-season; and in not a few cases, the male endeavours thus
to charm or excite the female. This, indeed, seems to have been the
primeval use and means of development of the voice, as I have attempted
to show in my 'Descent of Man.' Thus the use of the vocal organs will
have become associated with the anticipation of the strongest pleasure
which animals are capable of feeling. Animals which live in society
often call to each other when separated, and evidently feel much joy
at meeting; as we see with a horse, on the return of his companion, for
whom he has been neighing. The mother calls incessantly for her lost
young ones; for instance, a cow for her calf; and the young of many
animals call for their mothers. When a flock of sheep is scattered, the
ewes bleat incessantly for their lambs, and their mutual pleasure at
coming together is manifest. Woe betide the man who meddles with the
young of the larger and fiercer quadrupeds, if they hear the cry of
distress from their young. Rage leads to the violent exertion of all the
muscles, including those of the voice; and some animals, when enraged,
endeavour to strike terror into their enemies by its power and
harshness, as the lion does by roaring, and the dog by growling. I infer
that their object is to strike terror, because the lion at the same time
erects the hair of its mane, and the dog the hair along its back, and
thus they make themselves appear as large and terrible as possible.
Rival males try to excel and challenge each other by their voices,
and this leads to deadly contests. Thus the use of the voice will have
become associated with the emotion of anger, however it may be aroused.
We have also seen that intense pain, like rage, leads to violent
outcries, and the exertion of screaming by itself gives some relief; and
thus the use of the voice will have become associated with suffering of
any kind.

The cause of widely different sounds being uttered under different
emotions and sensations is a very obscure subject. Nor does the rule
always hold good that there is any marked difference. For instance with
the dog, the bark of anger and that of joy do not differ much,
though they can be distinguished. It is not probable that any precise
explanation of the cause or source of each particular sound, under
different states of the mind, will ever be given. We now that some
animals, after being domesticated, have acquired the habit of uttering
sounds which were not natural to them.[401] Thus domestic dogs, and even
tamed jackals, have learnt to bark, which is a noise not proper to any
species of the genus, with the exception of the _Canis latrans_ of
North America, which is said to bark. Some breeds, also, of the domestic
pigeon have learnt to coo in a new and quite peculiar manner.

The character of the human voice, under the influence of various
emotions, has been discussed by Mr. Herbert Spencer[402] in his
interesting essay on Music. He clearly shows that the voice alters much
under different conditions, in loudness and in quality, that is, in
resonance and _timbre_, in pitch and intervals. No one can listen to an
eloquent orator or preacher, or to a man calling angrily to another, or
to one expressing astonishment, without being struck with the truth of
Mr. Spencer's remarks. It is curious how early in life the modulation of
the voice becomes expressive. With one of my children, under the age of
two years, I clearly perceived that his humph of assent was rendered by
a slight modulation strongly emphatic; and that by a peculiar whine his
negative expressed obstinate determination. Mr. Spencer further shows
that emotional speech, in all the above respects is intimately related
to vocal music, and consequently to instrumental music; and he attempts
to explain the characteristic qualities of both on physiological
grounds--namely, on "the general law that a feeling is a stimulus to
muscular action." It may be admitted that the voice is affected through
this law; but the explanation appears to me too general and vague to
throw much light on the various differences, with the exception of that
of loudness, between ordinary speech and emotional speech, or singing.

This remark holds good, whether we believe that the various qualities
of the voice originated in speaking under the excitement of strong
feelings, and that these qualities have subsequently been transferred
to vocal music; or whether we believe, as I maintain, that the habit of
uttering musical sounds was first developed, as a means of courtship,
in the early progenitors of man, and thus became associated with the
strongest emotions of which they were capable,--namely, ardent love,
rivalry and triumph. That animals utter musical notes is familiar to
every one, as we may daily hear in the singing of birds. It is a more
remarkable fact that an ape, one of the Gibbons, produces an exact
octave of musical sounds, ascending and descending the scale by
halftones; so that this monkey "alone of brute mammals may be said to
sing."[403] From this fact, and from the analogy of other animals, I
have been led to infer that the progenitors of man probably uttered
musical tones, before they had acquired the power of articulate speech;
and that consequently, when the voice is used under any strong emotion,
it tends to assume, through the principle of association, a musical
character. We can plainly perceive, with some of the lower animals,
that the males employ their voices to please the females, and that
they themselves take pleasure in their own vocal utterances; but why
particular sounds are uttered, and why these give pleasure cannot at
present be explained.

That the pitch of the voice bears some relation to certain states
of feeling is tolerably clear. A person gently complaining of
ill-treatment, or slightly suffering, almost always speaks in a
high-pitched voice. Dogs, when a little impatient, often make a
high piping note through their noses, which at once strikes us as
plaintive;[404] but how difficult it is to know whether the sound is
essentially plaintive, or only appears so in this particular case, from
our having learnt by experience what it means! Rengger, states[405]
that the monkeys (_Cebus azaroe_), which he kept in Paraguay, expressed
astonishment by a half-piping, half-snarling noise; anger or impatience,
by repeating the sound _hu hu_ in a deeper, grunting voice; and fright
or pain, by shrill screams. On the other hand, with mankind, deep groans
and high piercing screams equally express an agony of pain. Laughter
maybe either high or low; so that, with adult men, as Haller long ago
remarked,[406] the sound partakes of the character of the vowels (as
pronounced in German) _O_ and _A_; whilst with children and women, it
has more of the character of _E_ and _I_; and these latter vowel-sounds
naturally have, as Helmholtz has shown, a higher pitch than the former;
yet both tones of laughter equally express enjoyment or amusement.

In considering the mode in which vocal utterances express emotion,
we are naturally led to inquire into the cause of what is called
"expression" in music. Upon this point Mr. Litchfield, who has long
attended to the subject of music, has been so kind as to give me the
following remarks:--"The question, what is the essence of musical
'expression' involves a number of obscure points, which, so far as I am
aware, are as yet unsolved enigmas. Up to a certain point, however,
any law which is found to hold as to the expression of the emotions by
simple sounds must apply to the more developed mode of expression in
song, which may be taken as the primary type of all music. A great part
of the emotional effect of a song depends on the character of the action
by which the sounds are produced. In songs, for instance, which express
great vehemence of passion, the effect often chiefly depends on the
forcible utterance of some one or two characteristic passages which
demand great exertion of vocal force; and it will be frequently noticed
that a song of this character fails of its proper effect when sung by a
voice of sufficient power and range to give the characteristic passages
without much exertion. This is, no doubt, the secret of the loss of
effect so often produced by the transposition of a song from one key
to another. The effect is thus seen to depend not merely on the actual
sounds, but also in part on the nature of the action which produces the
sounds. Indeed it is obvious that whenever we feel the 'expression' of
a song to be due to its quickness or slowness of movement--to smoothness
of flow, loudness of utterance, and so on--we are, in fact, interpreting
the muscular actions which produce sound, in the same way in which we
interpret muscular action generally. But this leaves unexplained
the more subtle and more specific effect which we call the MUSICAL
expression of the song--the delight given by its melody, or even by the
separate sounds which make up the melody. This is an effect indefinable
in language--one which, so far as I am aware, no one has been able to
analyse, and which the ingenious speculation of Mr. Herbert Spencer as
to the origin of music leaves quite unexplained. For it is certain that
the MELODIC effect of a series of sounds does not depend in the least on
their loudness or softness, or on their ABSOLUTE pitch. A tune is always
the same tune, whether it is sung loudly or softly, by a child or a man;
whether it is played on a flute or on a trombone. The purely musical
effect of any sound depends on its place in what is technically called
a 'scale;' the same sound producing absolutely different effects on the
ear, according as it is heard in connection with one or another series
of sounds.

"It is on this RELATIVE association of the sounds that all the
essentially characteristic effects which are summed up in the phrase
'musical expression,' depend. But why certain associations of sounds
have such-and-such effects, is a problem which yet remains to be solved.
These effects must indeed, in some way or other, be connected with the
well-known arithmetical relations between the rates of vibration of
the sounds which form a musical scale. And it is possible--but this is
merely a suggestion--that the greater or less mechanical facility with
which the vibrating apparatus of the human larynx passes from one state
of vibration to another, may have been a primary cause of the greater or
less pleasure produced by various sequences of sounds."

But leaving aside these complex questions and confining ourselves to the
simpler sounds, we can, at least, see some reasons for the association
of certain kinds of sounds with certain states of mind. A scream, for
instance, uttered by a young animal, or by one of the members of a
community, as a call for assistance, will naturally be loud, prolonged,
and high, so as to penetrate to a distance. For Helmholtz has shown[407]
that, owing to the shape of the internal cavity of the human ear and its
consequent power of resonance, high notes produce a particularly strong
impression. When male animals utter sounds in order to please the
females, they would naturally employ those which are sweet to the ears
of the species; and it appears that the same sounds are often pleasing
to widely different animals, owing to the similarity of their nervous
systems, as we ourselves perceive in the singing of birds and even in
the chirping of certain tree-frogs giving us pleasure. On the other
hand, sounds produced in order to strike terror into an enemy, would
naturally be harsh or displeasing.

Whether the principle of antithesis has come into play with sounds, as
might perhaps have been expected, is doubtful. The interrupted, laughing
or tittering sounds made by man and by various kinds of monkeys when
pleased, are as different as possible from the prolonged screams of
these animals when distressed. The deep grunt of satisfaction uttered
by a pig, when pleased with its food, is widely different from its harsh
scream of pain or terror. But with the dog, as lately remarked, the
bark of anger and that of joy are sounds which by no means stand in
opposition to each other; and so it is in some other cases.

There is another obscure point, namely, whether the sounds which are
produced under various states of the mind determine the shape of the
mouth, or whether its shape is not determined by independent causes, and
the sound thus modified. When young infants cry they open their mouths
widely, and this, no doubt, is necessary for pouring forth a full volume
of sound; but the mouth then assumes, from a quite distinct cause, an
almost quadrangular shape, depending, as will hereafter be explained, on
the firm closing of the eyelids, and consequent drawing up of the upper
lip. How far this square shape of the mouth modifies the wailing or
crying sound, I am not prepared to say; but we know from the researches
of Helmholtz and others that the form of the cavity of the mouth and
lips determines the nature and pitch of the vowel sounds which are
produced.

It will also be shown in a future chapter that, under the feeling of
contempt or disgust, there is a tendency, from intelligible causes, to
blow out of the mouth or nostrils, and this produces sounds like pooh
or pish. When any one is startled or suddenly astonished, there is an
instantaneous tendency, likewise from an intelligible cause, namely, to
be ready for prolonged exertion, to open the mouth widely, so as to draw
a deep and rapid inspiration. When the next full expiration follows,
the mouth is slightly closed, and the lips, from causes hereafter to be
discussed, are somewhat protruded; and this form of the mouth, if the
voice be at all exerted, produces, according to Helmholtz, the sound of
the vowel _O_. Certainly a deep sound of a prolonged _Oh!_ may be
heard from a whole crowd of people immediately after witnessing any
astonishing spectacle. If, together with surprise, pain be felt, there
is a tendency to contract all the muscles of the body, including those
of the face, and the lips will then be drawn back; and this will perhaps
account for the sound becoming higher and assuming the character of
_Ah!_ or _Ach!_ As fear causes all the muscles of the body to tremble,
the voice naturally becomes tremulous, and at the same time husky from
the dryness of the mouth, owing to the salivary glands failing to act.
Why the laughter of man and the tittering of monkeys should be a rapidly
reiterated sound, cannot be explained. During the utterance of these
sounds, the mouth is transversely elongated by the corners being drawn
backwards and upwards; and of this fact an explanation will be attempted
in a future chapter. But the whole subject of the differences of the
sounds produced under different states of the mind is so obscure, that I
have succeeded in throwing hardly any light on it; and the remarks which
I have made, have but little significance.

[Illustration: Sound producing quills from tail of a porcupine. Fig. 11]

All the sounds hitherto noticed depend on the respiratory organs; but
sounds produced by wholly different means are likewise expressive.
Rabbits stamp loudly on the ground as a signal to their comrades; and
if a man knows how to do so properly, he may on a quiet evening hear the
rabbits answering him all around. These animals, as well as some others,
also stamp on the ground when made angry. Porcupines rattle their quills
and vibrate their tails when angered; and one behaved in this manner
when a live snake was placed in its compartment. The quills
on the tail are very different from those on the body: they are short,
hollow, thin like a goose-quill, with their ends transversely truncated,
so that they are open; they are supported on long, thin, elastic
foot-stalks. Now, when the tail is rapidly shaken, these hollow quills
strike against each other and produce, as I heard in the presence of Mr.
Bartlett, a peculiar continuous sound. We can, I think, understand
why porcupines have been provided, through the modification of their
protective spines, with this special sound-producing instrument. They
are nocturnal animals, and if they scented or heard a prowling beast of
prey, it would be a great advantage to them in the dark to give warning
to their enemy what they were, and that they were furnished with
dangerous spines. They would thus escape being attacked. They are, as
I may add, so fully conscious of the power of their weapons, that when
enraged they will charge backwards with their spines erected, yet still
inclined backwards.

Many birds during their courtship produce diversified sounds by means of
specially adapted feathers. Storks, when excited, make a loud clattering
noise with their beaks. Some snakes produce a grating or rattling noise.
Many insects stridulate by rubbing together specially modified parts of
their hard integuments. This stridulation generally serves as a
sexual charm or call; but it is likewise used to express different
emotions.[408] Every one who has attended to bees knows that their
humming changes when they are angry; and this serves as a warning that
there is danger of being stung. I have made these few remarks because
some writers have laid so much stress on the vocal and respiratory
organs as having been specially adapted for expression, that it was
advisable to show that sounds otherwise produced serve equally well for
the same purpose.

_Erection of the dermal appendages_.--Hardly any expressive movement is
so general as the involuntary erection of the hairs, feathers and
other dermal appendages; for it is common throughout three of the great
vertebrate classes. These appendages are erected under the excitement
of anger or terror; more especially when these emotions are combined, or
quickly succeed each other. The action serves to make the animal appear
larger and more frightful to its enemies or rivals, and is generally
accompanied by various voluntary movements adapted for the same purpose,
and by the utterance of savage sounds. Mr. Bartlett, who has had such
wide experience with animals of all kinds, does not doubt that this is
the case; but it is a different question whether the power of erection
was primarily acquired for this special purpose.

I will first give a considerable body of facts showing how general this
action is with mammals, birds and reptiles; retaining what I have to
say in regard to man for a future chapter. Mr. Sutton, the intelligent
keeper in the Zoological Gardens, carefully observed for me the
Chimpanzee and Orang; and he states that when they are suddenly
frightened, as by a thunderstorm, or when they are made angry, as by
being teased, their hair becomes erect. I saw a chimpanzee who was
alarmed at the sight of a black coalheaver, and the hair rose all over
his body; he made little starts forward as if to attack the man,
without any real intention of doing so, but with the hope, as the keeper
remarked, of frightening him. The Gorilla, when enraged, is described by
Mr. Ford[409] as having his crest of hair "erect and projecting forward,
his nostrils dilated, and his under lip thrown down; at the same time
uttering his characteristic yell, designed, it would seem, to terrify
his antagonists." I saw the hair on the Anubis baboon, when angered
bristling along the back, from the neck to the loins, but not on
the rump or other parts of the body. I took a stuffed snake into the
monkey-house, and the hair on several of the species instantly became
erect; especially on their tails, as I particularly noticed with the
_Cereopithecus nictitans_. Brehm states[410] that the _Midas aedipus_
(belonging to the American division) when excited erects its mane, in
order, as he adds, to make itself as frightful as possible.

With the Carnivora the erection of the hair seems to be almost
universal, often accompanied by threatening movements, the uncovering of
the teeth and the utterance of savage growls. In the Herpestes, I have
seen the hair on end over nearly the whole body, including the tail; and
the dorsal crest is erected in a conspicuous manner by the Hyaena and
Proteles. The enraged lion erects his mane. The bristling of the hair
along the neck and back of the dog, and over the whole body of the
cat, especially on the tail, is familiar to every one. With the cat it
apparently occurs only under fear; with the dog, under anger and fear;
but not, as far as I have observed, under abject fear, as when a dog is
going to be flogged by a severe gamekeeper. If, however, the dog shows
fight, as sometimes happens, up goes his hair. I have often noticed that
the hair of a dog is particularly liable to rise, if he is half angry
and half afraid, as on beholding some object only indistinctly seen in
the dusk.

I have been assured by a veterinary surgeon that he has often seen the
hair erected on horses and cattle, on which he had operated and was
again going to operate. When I showed a stuffed snake to a Peccary, the
hair rose in a wonderful manner along its back; and so it does with
the boar when enraged. An Elk which gored a man to death in the United
States, is described as first brandishing his antlers, squealing with
rage and stamping on the ground; "at length his hair was seen to rise
and stand on end," and then he plunged forward to the attack.[411] The
hair likewise becomes erect on goats, and, as I hear from Mr. Blyth, on
some Indian antelopes. I have seen it erected on the hairy Ant-eater;
and on the Agouti, one of the Rodents. A female Bat,[412] which reared
her young under confinement, when any one looked into the cage "erected
the fur on her back, and bit viciously at intruding fingers."

Birds belonging to all the chief Orders ruffle their feathers when angry
or frightened. Every one must have seen two cocks, even quite young
birds, preparing to fight with erected neck-hackles; nor can these
feathers when erected serve as a means of defence, for cock-fighters
have found by experience that it is advantageous to trim them. The male
Ruff (_Machetes pugnax_) likewise erects its collar of feathers when
fighting. When a dog approaches a common hen with her chickens, she
spreads out her wings, raises her tail, ruffles all her feathers, and
looking as ferocious as possible, dashes at the intruder. The tail is
not always held in exactly the same position; it is sometimes so much
erected, that the central feathers, as in the accompanying drawing,
almost touch the back. Swans, when angered, likewise raise their wings
and tail, and erect their feathers. They open their beaks, and make by
paddling little rapid starts forwards, against any one who approaches
the water's edge too closely. Tropic birds[413] when disturbed on their
nests are said not to fly away, but "merely to stick out their feathers
and scream." The Barn-owl, when approached "instantly swells out its
plumage, extends its wings and tail, hisses and clacks its mandibles
with force and rapidity."[414] So do other kinds of owls. Hawks, as I am
informed by Mr. Jenner Weir, likewise ruffle their feathers, and spread
out their wings and tail under similar circumstances. Some kinds of
parrots erect their feathers; and I have seen this action in the
Cassowary, when angered at the sight of an Ant-eater. Young cuckoos in
the nest, raise their feathers, open their mouths widely, and make
themselves as frightful as possible.

[Illustration: Hen driving away a dog from her chickens. Fig. 12]

{illust. caption = FIG. 12--Hen driving away a dog from her chickens.
Drawn from life by Mr. Wood.}

[Illustration: Swan driving away an intruder. Fig 13]

{illust. caption = FIG. 13.--Swan driving away an intruder. Drawn from
life by Mr. Wood.}

Small birds, also, as I hear from Mr. Weir, such as various finches,
buntings and warblers, when angry, ruffle all their feathers, or only
those round the neck; or they spread out their wings and tail-feathers.
With their plumage in this state, they rush at each other with open
beaks and threatening gestures. Mr. Weir concludes from his large
experience that the erection of the feathers is caused much more by
anger than by fear. He gives as an instance a hybrid goldfinch of a most
irascible disposition, which when approached too closely by a servant,
instantly assumes the appearance of a ball of ruffled feathers. He
believes that birds when frightened, as a general rule, closely adpress
all their feathers, and their consequently diminished size is often
astonishing. As soon as they recover from their fear or surprise, the
first thing which they do is to shake out their feathers. The best
instances of this adpression of the feathers and apparent shrinking of
the body from fear, which Mr. Weir has noticed, has been in the quail
and grass-parrakeet.[415] The habit is intelligible in these birds from
their being accustomed, when in danger, either to squat on the ground or
to sit motionless on a branch, so as to escape detection. Though, with
birds, anger may be the chief and commonest cause of the erection of the
feathers, it is probable that young cuckoos when looked at in the nest,
and a hen with her chickens when approached by a dog, feel at least some
terror. Mr. Tegetmeier informs me that with game-cocks, the erection of
the feathers on the head has long been recognized in the cock-pit as a
sign of cowardice.

The males of some lizards, when fighting together during their
courtship, expand their throat pouches or frills, and erect their dorsal
crests.[416] But Dr. Gunther does not believe that they can erect their
separate spines or scales.

We thus see how generally throughout the two higher vertebrate classes,
and with some reptiles, the dermal appendages are erected under the
influence of anger and fear. The movement is effected, as we know
from Kolliker's interesting discovery, by the contraction of minute,
unstriped, involuntary muscles,[417] often called _arrectores pili_,
which are attached to the capsules of the separate hairs, feathers, &c.
By the contraction of these muscles the hairs can be instantly erected,
as we see in a dog, being at the same time drawn a little out of their
sockets; they are afterwards quickly depressed. The vast number of these
minute muscles over the whole body of a hairy quadruped is astonishing.
The erection of the hair is, however, aided in some cases, as with
that on the head of a man, by the striped and voluntary muscles of the
underlying _panniculus carnosus_. It is by the action of these latter
muscles, that the hedgehog erects its spines. It appears, also, from the
researches of Leydig[418] and others, that striped fibres extend from
the panniculus to some of the larger hairs, such as the vibrissae of
certain quadrupeds. The _arrectores pili_ contract not only under the
above emotions, but from the application of cold to the surface.
I remember that my mules and dogs, brought from a lower and warmer
country, after spending a night on the bleak Cordillera, had the hair
all over their bodies as erect as under the greatest terror. We see the
same action in our own _goose-skin_ during the chill before a fever-fit.
Mr. Lister has also found,[419] that tickling a neighbouring part of the
skin causes the erection and protrusion of the hairs.

From these facts it is manifest that the erection of the dermal
appendages is a reflex action, independent of the will; and this action
must be looked at, when, occurring under the influence of anger or
fear, not as a power acquired for the sake of some advantage, but as an
incidental result, at least to a large extent, of the sensorium being
affected. The result, in as far as it is incidental, may be compared
with the profuse sweating from an agony of pain or terror. Nevertheless,
it is remarkable how slight an excitement often suffices to cause the
hair to become erect; as when two dogs pretend to fight together in
play. We have, also, seen in a large number of animals, belonging to
widely distinct classes, that the erection of the hair or feathers is
almost always accompanied by various voluntary movements--by threatening
gestures, opening the mouth, uncovering the teeth, spreading out of the
wings and tail by birds, and by the utterance of harsh sounds; and the
purpose of these voluntary movements is unmistakable. Therefore it seems
hardly credible that the co-ordinated erection of the dermal appendages,
by which the animal is made to appear larger and more terrible to its
enemies or rivals, should be altogether an incidental and purposeless
result of the disturbance of the sensorium. This seems almost as
incredible as that the erection by the hedgehog of its spines, or of
the quills by the porcupine, or of the ornamental plumes by many birds
during their courtship, should all be purposeless actions.

We here encounter a great difficulty. How can the contraction of the
unstriped and involuntary _arrectores pili_ have been co-ordinated with
that of various voluntary muscles for the same special purpose? If
we could believe that the arrectores primordially had been voluntary
muscles, and had since lost their stripes and become involuntary, the
case would be comparatively simple. I am not, however, aware that there
is any evidence in favour of this view; although the reversed transition
would not have presented any great difficulty, as the voluntary muscles
are in an unstriped condition in the embryos of the higher animals, and
in the larvae of some crustaceans. Moreover in the deeper layers of the
skin of adult birds, the muscular network is, according to Leydig,[420]
in a transitional condition; the fibres exhibiting only indications of
transverse striation.

Another explanation seems possible. We may admit that originally the
_arrectores pili_ were slightly acted on in a direct manner, under the
influence of rage and terror, by the disturbance of the nervous system;
as is undoubtedly the case with our so-called _goose-skin_ before a
fever-fit. Animals have been repeatedly excited by rage and terror
during many generations; and consequently the direct effects of the
disturbed nervous system on the dermal appendages will almost
certainly have been increased through habit and through the tendency
of nerve-force to pass readily along accustomed channels. We shall
find this view of the force of habit strikingly confirmed in a future
chapter, where it will be shown that the hair of the insane is affected
in an extraordinary manner, owing to their repeated accesses of fury
and terror. As soon as with animals the power of erection had thus
been strengthened or increased, they must often have seen the hairs
or feathers erected in rival and enraged males, and the bulk of their
bodies thus increased. In this case it appears possible that they might
have wished to make themselves appear larger and more terrible to their
enemies, by voluntarily assuming a threatening attitude and uttering
harsh cries; such attitudes and utterances after a time becoming through
habit instinctive. In this manner actions performed by the contraction
of voluntary muscles might have been combined for the same special
purpose with those effected by involuntary muscles. It is even possible
that animals, when excited and dimly conscious of some change in the
state of their hair, might act on it by repeated exertions of their
attention and will; for we have reason to believe that the will is
able to influence in an obscure manner the action of some unstriped or
involuntary muscles, as in the period of the peristaltic movements
of the intestines, and in the contraction of the bladder. Nor must we
overlook the part which variation and natural selection may have played;
for the males which succeeded in making themselves appear the most
terrible to their rivals, or to their other enemies, if not of
overwhelming power, will on an average have left more offspring to
inherit their characteristic qualities, whatever these may be and
however first acquired, than have other males.

_The inflation of the body, and other means of exciting fear in an
enemy_.--Certain Amphibians and Reptiles, which either have no spines
to erect, or no muscles by which they can be erected, enlarge themselves
when alarmed or angry by inhaling air. This is well known to be the case
with toads and frogs. The latter animal is made, in AEsop's fable of
the 'Ox and the Frog,' to blow itself up from vanity and envy until
it burst. This action must have been observed during the most ancient
times, as, according to Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood,[421] the word _toad_
expresses in all the languages of Europe the habit of swelling. It has
been observed with some of the exotic species in the Zoological Gardens;
and Dr. Gunther believes that it is general throughout the group.
Judging from analogy, the primary purpose probably was to make the body
appear as large and frightful as possible to an enemy; but another, and
perhaps more important secondary advantage is thus gained. When frogs
are seized by snakes, which are their chief enemies, they enlarge
themselves wonderfully; so that if the snake be of small size, as Dr.
Gunther informs me, it cannot swallow the frog, which thus escapes being
devoured.

Chameleons and some other lizards inflate themselves when angry. Thus
a species inhabiting Oregon, the _Tapaya Douglasii_, is slow in its
movements and does not bite, but has a ferocious aspect; "when irritated
it springs in a most threatening manner at anything pointed at it, at
the same time opening its mouth wide and hissing audibly, after which it
inflates its body, and shows other marks of anger."[422]

Several kinds of snakes likewise inflate themselves when irritated.
The puff-adder (_Clotho arietans_) is remarkable in this respect; but
I believe, after carefully watching these animals, that they do not
act thus for the sake of increasing their apparent bulk, but simply
for inhaling a large supply of air, so as to produce their surprisingly
loud, harsh, and prolonged hissing sound. The Cobras-de-capello, when
irritated, enlarge themselves a little, and hiss moderately; but, at
the same time they lift their heads aloft, and dilate by means of their
elongated anterior ribs, the skin on each side of the neck into a large
flat disk,--the so-called hood. With their widely opened mouths, they
then assume a terrific aspect. The benefit thus derived ought to be
considerable, in order to compensate for the somewhat lessened rapidity
(though this is still great) with which, when dilated, they can strike
at their enemies or prey; on the same principle that a broad, thin piece
of wood cannot be moved through the air so quickly as a small round
stick. An innocuous snake, the _Trovidonotus macrophthalmus_, an
inhabitant of India, likewise dilates its neck when irritated;
and consequently is often mistaken for its compatriot, the deadly
Cobra.[423] This resemblance perhaps serves as some protection to the
Tropidonotus.

Another innocuous species, the Dasypeltis of South Africa, blows itself
out, distends its neck, hisses and darts at an intruder.[424] Many other
snakes hiss under similar circumstances. They also rapidly vibrate
their protruded tongues; and this may aid in increasing their terrific
appearance.

Snakes possess other means of producing sounds besides hissing. Many
years ago I observed in South America that a venomous Trigonocephalus,
when disturbed, rapidly vibrated the end of its tail, which striking
against the dry grass and twigs produced a rattling noise that could be
distinctly heard at the distance of six feet.[425] The deadly and fierce
_Echis carinata_ of India produces "a curious prolonged, almost hissing
sound in a very different manner, namely by rubbing the sides of the
folds of its body against each other," whilst the head remains in almost
the same position. The scales on the sides, and not on other parts of
the body, are strongly keeled, with the keels toothed like a saw; and as
the coiled-up animal rubs its sides together, these grate against each
other.[426] Lastly, we have the well-known case of the Rattle-snake. He
who has merely shaken the rattle of a dead snake, can form no just idea
of the sound produced by the living animal. Professor Shaler states that
it is indistinguishable from that made by the male of a large Cicada
(an Homopterous insect), which inhabits the same district.[427] In the
Zoological Gardens, when the rattle-snakes and puff-adders were greatly
excited at the same time, I was much struck at the similarity of the
sound produced by them; and although that made by the rattle-snake
is louder and shriller than the hissing of the puff-adder, yet when
standing at some yards distance I could scarcely distinguish the two.
For whatever purpose the sound is produced by the one species, I can
hardly doubt that it serves for the same purpose in the other species;
and I conclude from the threatening gestures made at the same time by
many snakes, that their hissing,--the rattling of the rattle-snake and
of the tail of the Trigonocephalus,--the grating of the scales of the
Echis,--and the dilatation of the hood of the Cobra,--all subserve the
same end, namely, to make them appear terrible to their enemies.[428]

It seems at first a probable conclusion that venomous snakes, such
as the foregoing, from being already so well defended by their
poison-fangs, would never be attacked by any enemy; and consequently
would have no need to excite additional terror. But this is far from
being the case, for they are largely preyed on in all quarters of the
world by many animals. It is well known that pigs are employed in the
United States to clear districts infested with rattle-snakes, which they
do most effectually.[429] In England the hedgehog attacks and devours
the viper. In India, as I hear from Dr. Jerdon, several kinds of hawks,
and at least one mammal, the Herpestes, kill cobras and other venomous
species;[430] and so it is in South Africa. Therefore it is by no means
improbable that any sounds or signs by which the venomous species could
instantly make themselves recognized as dangerous, would be of more
service to them than to the innocuous species which would not be able,
if attacked, to inflict any real injury.

Having said thus much about snakes, I am tempted to add a few remarks
on the means by which the rattle of the rattle-snake was probably
developed. Various animals, including some lizards, either curl or
vibrate their tails when excited. This is the case with many kinds
of snakes.[431] In the Zoological Gardens, an innocuous species, the
_Coronella Sayi_, vibrates its tail so rapidly that it becomes almost
invisible. The Trigonocephalus, before alluded to, has the same habit;
and the extremity of its tail is a little enlarged, or ends in a bead.
In the Lachesis, which is so closely allied to the rattle-snake that
it was placed by Linnaeus in the same genus, the tail ends in a single,
large, lancet-shaped point or scale. With some snakes the skin, as
Professor Shaler remarks, "is more imperfectly detached from the region
about the tail than at other parts of the body." Now if we suppose that
the end of the tail of some ancient American species was enlarged, and
was covered by a single large scale, this could hardly have been
cast off at the successive moults. In this case it would have been
permanently retained, and at each period of growth, as the snake grew
larger, a new scale, larger than the last, would have been formed
above it, and would likewise have been retained. The foundation for the
development of a rattle would thus have been laid; and it would have
been habitually used, if the species, like so many others, vibrated its
tail whenever it was irritated. That the rattle has since been specially
developed to serve as an efficient sound-producing instrument, there can
hardly be a doubt; for even the vertebrae included within the extremity
of the tail have been altered in shape and cohere. But there is no
greater improbability in various structures, such as the rattle of
the rattle-snake,--the lateral scales of the Echis,--the neck with
the included ribs of the Cobra,--and the whole body of the
puff-adder,--having been modified for the sake of warning and
frightening away their enemies, than in a bird, namely, the wonderful
Secretary-hawk (_Gypogeranus_) having had its whole frame modified for
the sake of killing snakes with impunity. It is highly probable, judging
from what we have before seen, that this bird would ruffle its feathers
whenever it attacked a snake; and it is certain that the Herpestes, when
it eagerly rushes to attack a snake, erects the hair all over its
body, and especially that on its tail.[432] We have also seen that some
porcupines, when angered or alarmed at the sight of a snake, rapidly
vibrate their tails, thus producing a peculiar sound by the striking
together of the hollow quills. So that here both the attackers and the
attacked endeavour to make themselves as dreadful as possible to each
other; and both possess for this purpose specialised means, which, oddly
enough, are nearly the same in some of these cases. Finally we can see
that if, on the one hand, those individual snakes, which were best able
to frighten away their enemies, escaped best from being devoured; and
if, on the other hand, those individuals of the attacking enemy survived
in larger numbers which were the best fitted for the dangerous task of
killing and devouring venomous snakes;--then in the one case as in the
other, beneficial variations, supposing the characters in question to
vary, would commonly have been preserved through the survival of the
fittest.

_The Drawing back and pressure of the Ears to the Head_.--The ears
through their movements are highly expressive in many animals; but in
some, such as man, the higher apes, and many ruminants, they fail in
this respect. A slight difference in position serves to express in the
plainest manner a different state of mind, as we may daily see in the
dog; but we are here concerned only with the ears being drawn closely
backwards and pressed to the head. A savage frame of mind is thus shown,
but only in the case of those animals which fight with their teeth; and
the care which they take to prevent their ears being seized by their
antagonists, accounts for this position. Consequently, through habit
and association, whenever they feel slightly savage, or pretend in their
play to be savage, their ears are drawn back. That this is the true
explanation may be inferred from the relation which exists in very many
animals between their manner of fighting and the retraction of their
ears.

All the Carnivora fight with their canine teeth, and all, as far as I
have observed, draw their ears back when feeling savage. This may be
continually seen with dogs when fighting in earnest, and with puppies
fighting in play. The movement is different from the falling down
and slight drawing back of the ears, when a dog feels pleased and is
caressed by his master. The retraction of the ears may likewise be seen
in kittens fighting together in their play, and in full-grown cats when
really savage, as before illustrated in fig. 9 (p. 58). Although their
ears are thus to a large extent protected, yet they often get much torn
in old male cats during their mutual battles. The same movement is very
striking in tigers, leopards, &c., whilst growling over their food in
menageries. The lynx has remarkably long ears; and their retraction,
when one of these animals is approached in its cage, is very
conspicuous, and is eminently expressive of its savage disposition. Even
one of the Eared Seals, the _Otariapusilla_, which has very small ears,
draws them backwards, when it makes a savage rush at the legs of its
keeper.

When horses fight together they use their incisors for biting, and
their fore-legs for striking, much more than they do their hind-legs
for kicking backwards. This has been observed when stallions have broken
loose and have fought together, and may likewise be inferred from the
kind of wounds which they inflict on each other. Every one recognizes
the vicious appearance which the drawing back of the ears gives to a
horse. This movement is very different from that of listening to a
sound behind. If an ill-tempered horse in a stall is inclined to kick
backwards, his ears are retracted from habit, though he has no intention
or power to bite. But when a horse throws up both hind-legs in play, as
when entering an open field, or when just touched by the whip, he does
not generally depress his ears, for he does not then feel vicious.
Guanacoes fight savagely with their teeth; and they must do so
frequently, for I found the hides of several which I shot in Patagonia
deeply scored. So do camels; and both these animals, when savage, draw
their ears closely backwards. Guanacoes, as I have noticed, when not
intending to bite, but merely to spit their offensive saliva from a
distance at an intruder, retract their ears. Even the hippopotamus, when
threatening with its widely-open enormous mouth a comrade, draws back
its small ears, just like a horse.

Now what a contrast is presented between the foregoing animals and
cattle, sheep, or goats, which never use their teeth in fighting, and
never draw back their ears when enraged! Although sheep and goats appear
such placid animals, the males often join in furious contests. As deer
form a closely related family, and as I did not know that they ever
fought with their teeth, I was much surprised at the account given by
Major Ross King of the Moose-deer in Canada. He says, when "two
males chance to meet, laying back their ears and gnashing their teeth
together, they rush at each other with appalling fury."[433] But Mr.
Bartlett informs me that some species of deer fight savagely with their
teeth, so that the drawing back of the ears by the moose accords with
our rule. Several kinds of kangaroos, kept in the Zoological Gardens,
fight by scratching with their fore-feet and by kicking with their
hind-legs; but they never bite each other, and the keepers have never
seen them draw back their ears when angered. Rabbits fight chiefly by
kicking and scratching, but they likewise bite each other; and I
have known one to bite off half the tail of its antagonist. At the
commencement of their battles they lay back their ears, but afterwards,
as they bound over and kick each other, they keep their ears erect, or
move them much about.

Mr. Bartlett watched a wild boar quarrelling rather savagely with his
sow; and both had their mouths open and their ears drawn backwards.
But this does not appear to be a common action with domestic pigs when
quarrelling. Boars fight together by striking upwards with their
tusks; and Mr. Bartlett doubts whether they then draw back their ears.
Elephants, which in like manner fight with their tusks, do not retract
their ears, but, on the contrary, erect them when rushing at each other
or at an enemy.

The rhinoceroses in the Zoological Gardens fight with their nasal horns,
and have never been seen to attempt biting each other except in play;
and the keepers are convinced that they do not draw back their ears,
like horses and dogs, when feeling savage. The following statement,
therefore, by Sir S. Baker[434] is inexplicable, namely, that a
rhinoceros, which he shot in North Africa, "had no ears; they had
been bitten off close to the head by another of the same species while
fighting; and this mutilation is by no means uncommon."

Lastly, with respect to monkeys. Some kinds, which have moveable ears,
and which fight with their teeth--for instance the _Cereopithecus
ruber_--draw back their ears when irritated just like dogs; and they
then have a very spiteful appearance. Other kinds, as the _Inuus
ecaudatus_, apparently do not thus act. Again, other kinds--and this
is a great anomaly in comparison with most other animals--retract their
ears, show their teeth, and jabber, when they are pleased by being
caressed. I observed this in two or three species of Macacus, and in
the _Cynopithecus niger_. This expression, owing to our familiarity
with dogs, would never be recognized as one of joy or pleasure by those
unacquainted with monkeys.

_Erection of the Ears_.--This movement requires hardly any notice. All
animals which have the power of freely moving their ears, when they are
startled, or when they closely observe any object, direct their ears
to the point towards which they are looking, in order to hear any sound
from this quarter. At the same time they generally raise their heads,
as all their organs of sense are there situated, and some of the smaller
animals rise on their hind-legs. Even those kinds which squat on the
ground or instantly flee away to avoid danger, generally act momentarily
in this manner, in order to ascertain the source and nature of the
danger. The head being raised, with erected ears and eyes directed
forwards, gives an unmistakable expression of close attention to any
animal.
