CHAPTER X. -- HATRED AND ANGER.

Hatred--Rage, effects of on the system--Uncovering of the teeth--Rage in
the insane--Anger and indignation--As expressed by the various races of
man--Sneering and defiance--The uncovering of the canine tooth on one
side of the face.


IF we have suffered or expect to suffer some wilful injury from a man,
or if he is in any way offensive to us, we dislike him; and dislike
easily rises into hatred. Such feelings, if experienced in a moderate
degree, are not clearly expressed by any movement of the body or
features, excepting perhaps by a certain gravity of behaviour, or by
some ill-temper. Few individuals, however, can long reflect about a
hated person, without feeling and exhibiting signs of indignation or
rage. But if the offending person be quite insignificant, we experience
merely disdain or contempt. If, on the other hand, he is all-powerful,
then hatred passes into terror, as when a slave thinks about a cruel
master, or a savage about a bloodthirsty malignant deity.[1001] Most of
our emotions are so closely connected with their expression, that they
hardly exist if the body remains passive--the nature of the expression
depending in chief part on the nature of the actions which have been
habitually performed under this particular state of the mind. A man,
for instance, may know that his life is in the extremest peril, and may
strongly desire to save if; yet, as Louis XVI. said, when surrounded by
a fierce mob, "Am I afraid? feel my pulse." So a man may intensely hate
another, but until his bodily frame is affected, he cannot be said to be
enraged.


_Rage_.--I have already had occasion to treat of this emotion in the
third chapter, when discussing the direct influence of the excited
sensorium on the body, in combination with the effects of habitually
associated actions. Rage exhibits itself in the most diversified manner.
The heart and circulation are always affected; the face reddens or
becomes purple, with the veins on the forehead and neck distended. The
reddening of the skin has been observed with the copper-coloured Indians
of South America,[1002] and even, as it is said, on the white cicatrices
left by old wounds on negroes.[1003] Monkeys also redden from passion.
With one of my own infants, under four months old, I repeatedly observed
that the first symptom of an approaching passion was the rushing of the
blood into his bare scalp. On the other hand, the action of the heart
is sometimes so much impeded by great rage, that the countenance becomes
pallid or livid,[1004] and not a few men with heart-disease have dropped
down dead under this powerful emotion.

The respiration is likewise affected; the chest heaves, and the dilated
nostrils quiver.[1005] As Tennyson writes, "sharp breaths of anger
puffed her fairy nostrils out." Hence we have such expressions as
"breathing out vengeance," and "fuming with anger."[1006]

The excited brain gives strength to the muscles, and at the same time
energy to the will. The body is commonly held erect ready for instant
action, but sometimes it is bent forward towards the offending person,
with the limbs more or less rigid. The mouth is generally closed with
firmness, showing fixed determination, and the teeth are clenched or
ground together. Such gestures as the raising of the arms, with the
fists clenched, as if to strike the offender, are common. Few men in a
great passion, and telling some one to begone, can resist acting as
if they intended to strike or push the man violently away. The desire,
indeed, to strike often becomes so intolerably strong, that inanimate
objects are struck or dashed to the ground; but the gestures frequently
become altogether purposeless or frantic. Young children, when in a
violent rage roll on the ground on their backs or bellies, screaming,
kicking, scratching, or biting everything within reach. So it is, as I
hear from Mr. Scott, with Hindoo children; and, as we have seen, with
the young of the anthropomorphous apes.

But the muscular system is often affected in a wholly different way; for
trembling is a frequent consequence of extreme rage. The paralysed
lips then refuse to obey the will, "and the voice sticks in the
throat;"[1007] or it is rendered loud, harsh, and discordant. If
there be much and rapid speaking, the mouth froths. The hair sometimes
bristles; but I shall return to this subject in another chapter, when I
treat of the mingled emotions of rage and terror. There is in most cases
a strongly-marked frown on the forehead; for this follows from the sense
of anything displeasing or difficult, together with concentration of
mind. But sometimes the brow, instead of being much contracted and
lowered, remains smooth, with the glaring eyes kept widely open. The
eyes are always bright, or may, as Homer expresses it, glisten with
fire. They are sometimes bloodshot, and are said to protrude from their
sockets--the result, no doubt, of the head being gorged with blood, as
shown by the veins being distended. According to Gratiolet, "the pupils
are always contracted in rage," and I hear from Dr. Crichton Browne that
this is the case in the fierce delirium of meningitis; but the movements
of the iris under the influence of the different emotions is a very
obscure subject.

Shakspeare sums up the chief characteristics of rage as follows:--

      "In peace there's nothing so becomes a man,
      As modest stillness and humility;
      But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
      Then imitate the action of the tiger:
      Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
      Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
      Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide,
      Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
      To his full height! On, on, you noblest English."
     _Henry V_., act iii. sc. 1.


The lips are sometimes protruded during rage in a manner, the meaning
of which I do not understand, unless it depends on our descent from some
ape-like animal. Instances have been observed, not only with Europeans,
but with the Australians and Hindoos. The lips, however, are much more
commonly retracted, the grinning or clenched teeth being thus
exposed. This has been noticed by almost every one who has written on
expression.[1009] The appearance is as if the teeth were uncovered,
ready for seizing or tearing an enemy, though there may be no intention
of acting in this manner. Mr. Dyson Lacy has seen this grinning
expression with the Australians, when quarrelling, and so has Gaika with
the Kafirs of South America. Dickens,[1010] in speaking of an atrocious
murderer who had just been caught, and was surrounded by a furious mob,
describes "the people as jumping up one behind another, snarling with
their teeth, and making at him like wild beasts." Every one who has had
much to do with young children must have seen how naturally they take to
biting, when in a passion. It seems as instinctive in them as in young
crocodiles, who snap their little jaws as soon as they emerge from the
egg.

A grinning expression and the protrusion of the lips appear sometimes
to go together. A close observer says that he has seen many instances
of intense hatred (which can hardly be distinguished from rage, more or
less suppressed) in Orientals, and once in an elderly English woman. In
all these cases there "was a grin, not a scowl--the lips lengthening,
the cheeks settling downwards, the eyes half-closed, whilst the brow
remained perfectly calm."[1011]

This retraction of the lips and uncovering of the teeth during paroxysms
of rage, as if to bite the offender, is so remarkable, considering how
seldom the teeth are used by men in fighting, that I inquired from Dr.
J. Crichton Browne whether the habit was common in the insane whose
passions are unbridled. He informs me that he has repeatedly observed
it both with the insane and idiotic, and has given me the following
illustrations:--

Shortly before receiving my letter, he witnessed an uncontrollable
outbreak of anger and delusive jealousy in an insane lady. At first she
vituperated her husband, and whilst doing so foamed at the mouth. Next
she approached close to him with compressed lips, and a virulent set
frown. Then she drew back her lips, especially the corners of the upper
lip, and showed her teeth, at the same time aiming a vicious blow at
him. A second case is that of an old soldier, who, when he is requested
to conform to the rules of the establishment, gives way to discontent,
terminating in fury. He commonly begins by asking Dr. Browne whether
he is not ashamed to treat him in such a manner. He then swears and
blasphemes, paces tip and down, tosses his arms wildly about, and
menaces any one near him. At last, as his exasperation culminates, he
rushes up towards Dr. Browne with a peculiar sidelong movement, shaking
his doubled fist, and threatening destruction. Then his upper lip may
be seen to be raised, especially at the corners, so that his huge canine
teeth are exhibited. He hisses forth his curses through his set teeth,
and his whole expression assumes the character of extreme ferocity.
A similar description is applicable to another man, excepting that he
generally foams at the mouth and spits, dancing and jumping about in
a strange rapid manner, shrieking out his maledictions in a shrill
falsetto voice.

Dr. Browne also informs me of the case of an epileptic idiot, incapable
of independent movements, and who spends the whole day in playing with
some toys; but his temper is morose and easily roused into fierceness.
When any one touches his toys, he slowly raises his head from its
habitual downward position, and fixes his eyes on the offender, with a
tardy yet angry scowl. If the annoyance be repeated, he draws back his
thick lips and reveals a prominent row of hideous fangs (large canines
being especially noticeable), and then makes a quick and cruel clutch
with his open hand at the offending person. The rapidity of this clutch,
as Dr. Browne remarks, is marvellous in a being ordinarily so torpid
that he takes about fifteen seconds, when attracted by any noise, to
turn his head from one side to the other. If, when thus incensed, a
handkerchief, book, or other article, be placed into his hands, he drags
it to his mouth and bites it. Mr. Nicol has likewise described to me two
cases of insane patients, whose lips are retracted during paroxysms of
rage.

Dr. Maudsley, after detailing various strange animal-like traits in
idiots, asks whether these are not due to the reappearance of primitive
instincts--"a faint echo from a far-distant past, testifying to a
kinship which man has almost outgrown." He adds, that as every human
brain passes, in the course of its development, through the same stages
as those occurring in the lower vertebrate animals, and as the brain
of an idiot is in an arrested condition, we may presume that it "will
manifest its most primitive functions, and no higher functions." Dr.
Maudsley thinks that the same view may be extended to the brain in its
degenerated condition in some insane patients; and asks, whence come
"the savage snarl, the destructive disposition, the obscene language,
the wild howl, the offensive habits, displayed by some of the insane?
Why should a human being, deprived of his reason, ever become so
brutal in character, as some do, unless he has the brute nature within
him?"[1012] This question must, as it would appear, he answered in the
affirmative.

_Anger, Indignation_.--These states of the mind differ from rage only
in degree, and there is no marked distinction in their characteristic
signs. Under moderate anger the action of the heart is a little
increased, the colour heightened, and the eyes become bright. The
respiration is likewise a little hurried; and as all the muscles serving
for this function act in association, the wings of the nostrils are
somewhat raised to allow of a free indraught of air; and this is
a highly characteristic sign of indignation. The mouth is commonly
compressed, and there is almost always a frown on the brow. Instead of
the frantic gestures of extreme rage, an indignant man unconsciously
throws himself into an attitude ready for attacking or striking his
enemy, whom he will perhaps scan from head to foot in defiance. He
carries his head erect, with his chest well expanded, and the feet
planted firmly on the ground. He holds his arms in various positions,
with one or both elbows squared, or with the arms rigidly suspended by
his sides. With Europeans the fists are commonly clenched.[1013] The
figures 1 and 2 in Plate VI. are fairly good representations of men
simulating indignation. Any one may see in a mirror, if he will vividly
imagine that he has been insulted and demands an explanation in an angry
tone of voice, that he suddenly and unconsciously throws himself into
some such attitude.

[Illustration: Anger and Indignation.  Plate VI]

Rage, anger, and indignation are exhibited in nearly the same manner
throughout the world; and the following descriptions may be worth giving
as evidence of this, and as illustrations of some of the foregoing
remarks. There is, however, an exception with respect to clenching the
fists, which seems confined chiefly to the men who fight with their
fists. With the Australians only one of my informants has seen the fists
clenched. All agree about the body being held erect; and all, with two
exceptions, state that the brows are heavily contracted. Some of them
allude to the firmly-compressed mouth, the distended nostrils, and
flashing eyes. According to the Rev. Mr. Taplin, rage, with the
Australians, is expressed by the lips being protruded, the eyes being
widely open; and in the case of the women by their dancing about and
casting dust into the air. Another observer speaks of the native men,
when enraged, throwing their arms wildly about.

I have received similar accounts, except as to the clenching of
the fists, in regard to the Malays of the Malacca peninsula, the
Abyssinians, and the natives of South Africa. So it is with the Dakota
Indians of North America; and, according to Mr. Matthews, they then hold
their heads erect, frown, and often stalk away with long strides. Mr.
Bridges states that the Fuegians, when enraged, frequently stamp on the
ground, walk distractedly about, sometimes cry and grow pale. The Rev.
Mr. Stack watched a New Zealand man and woman quarrelling, and made the
following entry in his note-book: "Eyes dilated, body swayed violently
backwards and forwards, head inclined forwards, fists clenched, now
thrown behind the body, now directed towards each other's faces." Mr.
Swinhoe says that my description agrees with what he has seen of the
Chinese, excepting that an angry man generally inclines his body towards
his antagonist, and pointing at him, pours forth a volley of abuse.

Lastly, with respect to the natives of India, Mr. J. Scott has sent me
a full description of their gestures and expression when enraged. Two
low-caste Bengalees disputed about a loan. At first they were calm, but
soon grew furious and poured forth the grossest abuse on each other's
relations and progenitors for many generations past. Their gestures were
very different from those of Europeans; for though their chests were
expanded and shoulders squared, their arms remained rigidly suspended,
with the elbows turned inwards and the hands alternately clenched and
opened. Their shoulders were often raised high, and then again lowered.
They looked fiercely at each other from under their lowered and strongly
wrinkled brows, and their protruded lips were firmly closed. They
approached each other, with heads and necks stretched forwards, and
pushed, scratched, and grasped at each other. This protrusion of the
head and body seems a common gesture with the enraged; and I have
noticed it with degraded English women whilst quarrelling violently in
the streets. In such cases it may be presumed that neither party expects
to receive a blow from the other.

A Bengalee employed in the Botanic Gardens was accused, in the presence
of Mr. Scott, by the native overseer of having stolen a valuable plant.
He listened silently and scornfully to the accusation; his attitude
erect, chest expanded, mouth closed, lips protruding, eyes firmly
set and penetrating. He then defiantly maintained his innocence, with
upraised and clenched hands, his head being now pushed forwards, with
the eyes widely open and eyebrows raised. Mr. Scott also watched two
Mechis, in Sikhim, quarrelling about their share of payment. They soon
got into a furious passion, and then their bodies became less erect,
with their heads pushed forwards; they made grimaces at each other;
their shoulders were raised; their arms rigidly bent inwards at the
elbows, and their hands spasmodically closed, but not properly clenched.
They continually approached and retreated from each other, and often
raised their arms as if to strike, but their hands were open, and no
blow was given. Mr. Scott made similar observations on the Lepchas whom
he often saw quarrelling, and he noticed that they kept their arms rigid
and almost parallel to their bodies, with the hands pushed somewhat
backwards and partially closed, but not clenched.


_Sneering, Defiance: Uncovering the canine tooth on one side_.--The
expression which I wish here to consider differs but little from that
already described, when the lips are retracted and the grinning teeth
exposed. The difference consists solely in the upper lip being retracted
in such a manner that the canine tooth on one side of the face alone
is shown; the face itself being generally a little upturned and half
averted from the person causing offence. The other signs of rage are not
necessarily present. This expression may occasionally be observed in
a person who sneers at or defies another, though there may be no real
anger; as when any one is playfully accused of some fault, and answers,
"I scorn the imputation." The expression is not a common one, but I
have seen it exhibited with perfect distinctness by a lady who was being
quizzed by another person. It was described by Parsons as long ago as
1746, with an engraving, showing the uncovered canine on one side.[1014]
Mr. Rejlander, without my having made any allusion to the subject,
asked me whether I had ever noticed this expression, as he had been much
struck by it. He has photographed for me (Plate IV. fig 1) a lady, who
sometimes unintentionally displays the canine on one side, and who can
do so voluntarily with unusual distinctness.

The expression of a half-playful sneer graduates into one of great
ferocity when, together with a heavily frowning brow and fierce eye, the
canine tooth is exposed. A Bengalee boy was accused before Mr. Scott of
some misdeed. The delinquent did not dare to give vent to his wrath
in words, but it was plainly shown on his countenance, sometimes by a
defiant frown, and sometimes "by a thoroughly canine snarl." When this
was exhibited, "the corner of the lip over the eye-tooth, which happened
in this case to be large and projecting, was raised on the side of his
accuser, a strong frown being still retained on the brow." Sir C. Bell
states[1015] that the actor Cooke could express the most determined hate
"when with the oblique cast of his eyes he drew up the outer part of the
upper lip, and discovered a sharp angular tooth."

The uncovering of the canine tooth is the result of a double movement.
The angle or corner of the mouth is drawn a little backwards, and at the
same time a muscle which runs parallel to and near the nose draws up the
outer part of the upper lip, and exposes the canine on this side of
the face. The contraction of this muscle makes a distinct furrow on the
cheek, and produces strong wrinkles under the eye, especially at its
inner corner. The action is the same as that of a snarling dog; and a
dog when pretending to fight often draws up the lip on one side alone,
namely that facing his antagonist. Our word _sneer_ is in fact the
same as _snarl_, which was originally _snar_, the _l_ "being merely an
element implying continuance of action."[1016]

I suspect that we see a trace of this same expression in what is called
a derisive or sardonic smile. The lips are then kept joined or almost
joined, but one corner of the mouth is retracted on the side towards the
derided person; and this drawing back of the corner is part of a true
sneer. Although some persons smile more on one side of their face than
on the other, it is not easy to understand why in cases of derision the
smile, if a real one, should so commonly be confined to one side. I have
also on these occasions noticed a slight twitching of the muscle which
draws up the outer part of the upper lip; and this movement, if fully
carried out, would have uncovered the canine, and would have produced a
true sneer.

Mr. Bulmer, an Australian missionary in a remote part of Gipps' Land,
says, in answer to my query about the uncovering of the canine on one
side, "I find that the natives in snarling at each other speak with
the teeth closed, the upper lip drawn to one side, and a general angry
expression of face; but they look direct at the person addressed." Three
other observers in Australia, one in Abyssinia, and one in China, answer
my query on this head in the affirmative; but as the expression is rare,
and as they enter into no details, I am afraid of implicitly trusting
them. It is, however, by no means improbable that this animal-like
expression may be more common with savages than with civilized races.
Mr. Geach is an observer who may be fully trusted, and he has observed
it on one occasion in a Malay in the interior of Malacca. The Rev. S.
O. Glenie answers, "We have observed this expression with the natives of
Ceylon, but not often." Lastly, in North America, Dr. Rothrock has seen
it with some wild Indians, and often in a tribe adjoining the Atnahs.

Although the upper lip is certainly sometimes raised on one side alone
in sneering at or defying any one, I do not know that this is always the
case, for the face is commonly half averted, and the expression is
often momentary. The movement being confined to one side may not be an
essential part of the expression, but may depend on the proper muscles
being incapable of movement excepting on one side. I asked four persons
to endeavour to act voluntarily in this manner; two could expose the
canine only on the left side, one only on the right side, and the fourth
on neither side. Nevertheless it is by no means certain that these same
persons, if defying any one in earnest, would not unconsciously
have uncovered their canine tooth on the side, whichever it might
be, towards the offender. For we have seen that some persons cannot
voluntarily make their eyebrows oblique, yet instantly act in this
manner when affected by any real, although most trifling, cause of
distress. The power of voluntarily uncovering the canine on one side
of the face being thus often wholly lost, indicates that it is a rarely
used and almost abortive action. It is indeed a surprising fact that man
should possess the power, or should exhibit any tendency to its use; for
Mr. Sutton has never noticed a snarling action in our nearest allies,
namely, the monkeys in the Zoological Gardens, and he is positive that
the baboons, though furnished with great canines, never act thus, but
uncover all their teeth when feeling savage and ready for an attack.
Whether the adult anthropomorphous apes, in the males of whom the
canines are much larger than in the females, uncover them when prepared
to fight, is not known.

The expression here considered, whether that of a playful sneer or
ferocious snarl, is one of the most curious which occurs in man. It
reveals his animal descent; for no one, even if rolling on the ground in
a deadly grapple with an enemy, and attempting to bite him, would try to
use his canine teeth more than his other teeth. We may readily believe
from our affinity to the anthropomorphous apes that our male semi-human
progenitors possessed great canine teeth, and men are now occasionally
born having them of unusually large size, with interspaces in the
opposite jaw for their reception.[1017] We may further suspect,
notwithstanding that we have no support from analogy, that our
semi-human progenitors uncovered their canine teeth when prepared for
battle, as we still do when feeling ferocious, or when merely sneering
at or defying some one, without any intention of making a real attack
with our teeth.