CHAPTER I. -- GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION.

The three chief principles stated--The first principle--Serviceable
actions become habitual in association with certain states of the mind,
and are performed whether or not of service in each particular
case--The force of habit--Inheritance--Associated habitual movements in
man--Reflex actions--Passage of habits into reflex actions--Associated
habitual movements in the lower animals--Concluding remarks.


I WILL begin by giving the three Principles, which appear to me to
account for most of the expressions and gestures involuntarily used by
man and the lower animals, under the influence of various emotions and
sensations.[101] I arrived, however, at these three Principles only at
the close of my observations. They will be discussed in the present and
two following chapters in a general manner. Facts observed both with man
and the lower animals will here be made use of; but the latter facts
are preferable, as less likely to deceive us. In the fourth and fifth
chapters, I will describe the special expressions of some of the lower
animals; and in the succeeding chapters those of man. Everyone will thus
be able to judge for himself, how far my three principles throw light on
the theory of the subject. It appears to me that so many expressions are
thus explained in a fairly satisfactory manner, that probably all will
hereafter be found to come under the same or closely analogous heads.
I need hardly premise that movements or changes in any part of the
body,--as the wagging of a dog's tail, the drawing back of a horse's
ears, the shrugging of a man's shoulders, or the dilatation of
the capillary vessels of the skin,--may all equally well serve for
expression. The three Principles are as follows.

I. _The principle of serviceable associated Habits_.--Certain complex
actions are of direct or indirect service under certain states of the
mind, in order to relieve or gratify certain sensations, desires, &c.;
and whenever the same state of mind is induced, however feebly, there
is a tendency through the force of habit and association for the same
movements to be performed, though they may not then be of the least use.
Some actions ordinarily associated through habit with certain states of
the mind may be partially repressed through the will, and in such cases
the muscles which are least under the separate control of the will are
the most liable still to act, causing movements which we recognize as
expressive. In certain other cases the checking of one habitual movement
requires other slight movements; and these are likewise expressive.

II. _The principle of Antithesis_.--Certain states of the mind lead
to certain habitual actions, which are of service, as under our first
principle. Now when a directly opposite state of mind is induced, there
is a strong and involuntary tendency to the performance of movements
of a directly opposite nature, though these are of no use; and such
movements are in some cases highly expressive.

III. _The principle of actions due to the constitution of the Nervous
System, independently from the first of the Will, and independently to
a certain extent of Habit_.--When the sensorium is strongly excited,
nerve-force is generated in excess, and is transmitted in certain
definite directions, depending on the connection of the nerve-cells,
and partly on habit: or the supply of nerve-force may, as it appears, be
interrupted. Effects are thus produced which we recognize as expressive.
This third principle may, for the sake of brevity, be called that of the
direct action of the nervous system.


With respect to our _first Principle_, it is notorious how powerful is
the force of habit. The most complex and difficult movements can in
time be performed without the least effort or consciousness. It is not
positively known how it comes that habit is so efficient in facilitating
complex movements; but physiologists admit[102] "that the conducting
power of the nervous fibres increases with the frequency of their
excitement." This applies to the nerves of motion and sensation, as
well as to those connected with the act of thinking. That some physical
change is produced in the nerve-cells or nerves which are habitually
used can hardly be doubted, for otherwise it is impossible to understand
how the tendency to certain acquired movements is inherited. That they
are inherited we see with horses in certain transmitted paces, such as
cantering and ambling, which are not natural to them,--in the pointing
of young pointers and the setting of young setters--in the peculiar
manner of flight of certain breeds of the pigeon, &c. We have analogous
cases with mankind in the inheritance of tricks or unusual gestures, to
which we shall presently recur. To those who admit the gradual evolution
of species, a most striking instance of the perfection with which the
most difficult consensual movements can be transmitted, is afforded by
the humming-bird Sphinx-moth (_Macroglossa_); for this moth, shortly
after its emergence from the cocoon, as shown by the bloom on its
unruffled scales, may be seen poised stationary in the air, with its
long hair-like proboscis uncurled and inserted into the minute orifices
of flowers; and no one, I believe, has ever seen this moth learning to
perform its difficult task, which requires such unerring aim.

When there exists an inherited or instinctive tendency to the
performance of an action, or an inherited taste for certain kinds of
food, some degree of habit in the individual is often or generally
requisite. We find this in the paces of the horse, and to a certain
extent in the pointing of dogs; although some young dogs point
excellently the first time they are taken out, yet they often associate
the proper inherited attitude with a wrong odour, and even with
eyesight. I have heard it asserted that if a calf be allowed to suck
its mother only once, it is much more difficult afterwards to rear it by
hand.[103] Caterpillars which have been fed on the leaves of one kind
of tree, have been known to perish from hunger rather than to eat the
leaves of another tree, although this afforded them their proper food,
under a state of nature;[104] and so it is in many other cases.

The power of Association is admitted by everyone. Mr. Bain remarks, that
"actions, sensations and states of feeling, occurring together or in
close succession, tend to grow together, or cohere, in such a way that
when any one of them is afterwards presented to the mind, the others are
apt to be brought up in idea."[105] It is so important for our purpose
fully to recognize that actions readily become associated with other
actions and with various states of the mind, that I will give a good
many instances, in the first place relating to man, and afterwards to
the lower animals. Some of the instances are of a very trifling nature,
but they are as good for our purpose as more important habits. It is
known to everyone how difficult, or even impossible it is, without
repeated trials, to move the limbs in certain opposed directions which
have never been practised. Analogous cases occur with sensations, as
in the common experiment of rolling a marble beneath the tips of two
crossed fingers, when it feels exactly like two marbles. Everyone
protects himself when falling to the ground by extending his arms,
and as Professor Alison has remarked, few can resist acting thus, when
voluntarily falling on a soft bed. A man when going out of doors puts
on his gloves quite unconsciously; and this may seem an extremely simple
operation, but he who has taught a child to put on gloves, knows that
this is by no means the case.

When our minds are much affected, so are the movements of our bodies;
but here another principle besides habit, namely the undirected overflow
of nerve-force, partially comes into play. Norfolk, in speaking of
Cardinal Wolsey, says--

    "Some strange commotion
     Is in his brain; he bites his lip and starts;
     Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
     Then, lays his finger on his temple: straight,
     Springs out into fast gait; then, stops again,
     Strikes his breast hard; and anon, he casts
     His eye against the moon: in most strange postures
     We have seen him set himself."--_Hen. VIII_., act 3, sc. 2.


A vulgar man often scratches his head when perplexed in mind; and I
believe that he acts thus from habit, as if he experienced a slightly
uncomfortable bodily sensation, namely, the itching of his head, to
which he is particularly liable, and which he thus relieves. Another man
rubs his eyes when perplexed, or gives a little cough when embarrassed,
acting in either case as if he felt a slightly uncomfortable sensation
in his eyes or windpipe.[106]

From the continued use of the eyes, these organs are especially liable
to be acted on through association under various states of the mind,
although there is manifestly nothing to be seen. A man, as Gratiolet
remarks, who vehemently rejects a proposition, will almost certainly
shut his eyes or turn away his face; but if he accepts the proposition,
he will nod his head in affirmation and open his eyes widely. The man
acts in this latter case as if he clearly saw the thing, and in the
former case as if he did not or would not see it. I have noticed that
persons in describing a horrid sight often shut their eyes momentarily
and firmly, or shake their heads, as if not to see or to drive away
something disagreeable; and I have caught myself, when thinking in the
dark of a horrid spectacle, closing my eyes firmly. In looking suddenly
at any object, or in looking all around, everyone raises his eyebrows,
so that the eyes may be quickly and widely opened; and Duchenne remarks
that[107] a person in trying to remember something often raises his
eyebrows, as if to see it. A Hindoo gentleman made exactly the same
remark to Mr. Erskine in regard to his countrymen. I noticed a young
lady earnestly trying to recollect a painter's name, and she first
looked to one corner of the ceiling and then to the opposite corner,
arching the one eyebrow on that side; although, of course, there was
nothing to be seen there.

In most of the foregoing cases, we can understand how the associated
movements were acquired through habit; but with some individuals,
certain strange gestures or tricks have arisen in association with
certain states of the mind, owing to wholly inexplicable causes, and are
undoubtedly inherited. I have elsewhere given one instance from my own
observation of an extraordinary and complex gesture, associated with
pleasurable feelings, which was transmitted from a father to his
daughter, as well as some other analogous facts.[108]

Another curious instance of an odd inherited movement, associated
with the wish to obtain an object, will be given in the course of this
volume.

There are other actions which are commonly performed under certain
circumstances, independently of habit, and which seem to be due to
imitation or some sort of sympathy. Thus persons cutting anything with a
pair of scissors may be seen to move their jaws simultaneously with the
blades of the scissors. Children learning to write often twist about
their tongues as their fingers move, in a ridiculous fashion. When a
public singer suddenly becomes a little hoarse, many of those present
may be heard, as I have been assured by a gentleman on whom I can rely,
to clear their throats; but here habit probably comes into play, as we
clear our own throats under similar circumstances. I have also been told
that at leaping matches, as the performer makes his spring, many of
the spectators, generally men and boys, move their feet; but here again
habit probably comes into play, for it is very doubtful whether women
would thus act.

_Reflex actions_--Reflex actions, in the strict sense of the term,
are due to the excitement of a peripheral nerve, which transmits its
influence to certain nerve-cells, and these in their turn excite certain
muscles or glands into action; and all this may take place without any
sensation or consciousness on our part, though often thus accompanied.
As many reflex actions are highly expressive, the subject must here
be noticed at some little length. We shall also see that some of them
graduate into, and can hardly be distinguished from actions which have
arisen through habit? Coughing and sneezing are familiar instances of
reflex actions. With infants the first act of respiration is often a
sneeze, although this requires the co-ordinated movement of numerous
muscles. Respiration is partly voluntary, but mainly reflex, and is
performed in the most natural and best manner without the interference
of the will. A vast number of complex movements are reflex. As good an
instance as can be given is the often-quoted one of a decapitated
frog, which cannot of course feel, and cannot consciously perform, any
movement. Yet if a drop of acid be placed on the lower surface of the
thigh of a frog in this state, it will rub off the drop with the upper
surface of the foot of the same leg. If this foot be cut off, it cannot
thus act. "After some fruitless efforts, therefore, it gives up trying
in that way, seems restless, as though, says Pfluger, it was seeking
some other way, and at last it makes use of the foot of the other leg
and succeeds in rubbing off the acid. Notably we have here not merely
contractions of muscles, but combined and harmonized contractions in
due sequence for a special purpose. These are actions that have all the
appearance of being guided by intelligence and instigated by will in
an animal, the recognized organ of whose intelligence and will has been
removed."[110]

We see the difference between reflex and voluntary movements in very
young children not being able to perform, as I am informed by Sir
Henry Holland, certain acts somewhat analogous to those of sneezing and
coughing, namely, in their not being able to blow their noses (i. e. to
compress the nose and blow violently through the passage), and in their
not being able to clear their throats of phlegm. They have to learn to
perform these acts, yet they are performed by us, when a little older,
almost as easily as reflex actions. Sneezing and coughing, however,
can be controlled by the will only partially or not at all; whilst
the clearing the throat and blowing the nose are completely under our
command.

When we are conscious of the presence of an irritating particle in our
nostrils or windpipe--that is, when the same sensory nerve-cells are
excited, as in the case of sneezing and coughing--we can voluntarily
expel the particle by forcibly driving air through these passages; but
we cannot do this with nearly the same force, rapidity, and precision,
as by a reflex action. In this latter case the sensory nerve-cells
apparently excite the motor nerve-cells without any waste of power
by first communicating with the cerebral hemispheres--the seat of our
consciousness and volition. In all cases there seems to exist a profound
antagonism between the same movements, as directed by the will and by a
reflex stimulant, in the force with which they are performed and in
the facility with which they are excited. As Claude Bernard asserts,
"L'influence du cerveau tend donc a entraver les mouvements reflexes, a
limiter leur force et leur etendue."[111]

The conscious wish to perform a reflex action sometimes stops or
interrupts its performance, though the proper sensory nerves may be
stimulated. For instance, many years ago I laid a small wager with a
dozen young men that they would not sneeze if they took snuff, although
they all declared that they invariably did so; accordingly they all took
a pinch, but from wishing much to succeed, not one sneezed, though their
eyes watered, and all, without exception, had to pay me the wager. Sir
H. Holland remarks[112] that attention paid to the act of swallowing
interferes with the proper movements; from which it probably follows, at
least in part, that some persons find it so difficult to swallow a pill.

Another familiar instance of a reflex action is the involuntary closing
of the eyelids when the surface of the eye is touched. A similar winking
movement is caused when a blow is directed towards the face; but this
is an habitual and not a strictly reflex action, as the stimulus is
conveyed through the mind and not by the excitement of a peripheral
nerve. The whole body and head are generally at the same time drawn
suddenly backwards. These latter movements, however, can be prevented,
if the danger does not appear to the imagination imminent; but our
reason telling us that there is no danger does not suffice. I may
mention a trifling fact, illustrating this point, and which at the time
amused me. I put my face close to the thick glass-plate in front of a
puff-adder in the Zoological Gardens, with the firm determination of not
starting back if the snake struck at me; but, as soon as the blow was
struck, my resolution went for nothing, and I jumped a yard or two
backwards with astonishing rapidity. My will and reason were powerless
against the imagination of a danger which had never been experienced.

The violence of a start seems to depend partly on the vividness of the
imagination, and partly on the condition, either habitual or temporary,
of the nervous system. He who will attend to the starting of his horse,
when tired and fresh, will perceive how perfect is the gradation from a
mere glance at some unexpected object, with a momentary doubt whether it
is dangerous, to a jump so rapid and violent, that the animal probably
could not voluntarily whirl round in so rapid a manner. The nervous
system of a fresh and highly-fed horse sends its order to the motory
system so quickly, that no time is allowed for him to consider whether
or not the danger is real. After one violent start, when he is excited
and the blood flows freely through his brain, he is very apt to start
again; and so it is, as I have noticed, with young infants.

A start from a sudden noise, when the stimulus is conveyed through
the auditory nerves, is always accompanied in grown-up persons by the
winking of the eyelids.[113] I observed, however, that though my infants
started at sudden sounds, when under a fortnight old, they certainly did
not always wink their eyes, and I believe never did so. The start of an
older infant apparently represents a vague catching hold of something to
prevent falling. I shook a pasteboard box close before the eyes of one
of my infants, when 114 days old, and it did not in the least wink; but
when I put a few comfits into the box, holding it in the same position
as before, and rattled them, the child blinked its eyes violently
every time, and started a little. It was obviously impossible that a
carefully-guarded infant could have learnt by experience that a rattling
sound near its eyes indicated danger to them. But such experience
will have been slowly gained at a later age during a long series of
generations; and from what we know of inheritance, there is nothing
improbable in the transmission of a habit to the offspring at an earlier
age than that at which it was first acquired by the parents.

From the foregoing remarks it seems probable that some actions, which
were at first performed consciously, have become through habit and
association converted into reflex actions, and are now so firmly fixed
and inherited, that they are performed, even when not of the least
use,[114] as often as the same causes arise, which originally excited
them in us through the volition. In such cases the sensory nerve-cells
excite the motor cells, without first communicating with those cells
on which our consciousness and volition depend. It is probable
that sneezing and coughing were originally acquired by the habit of
expelling, as violently as possible, any irritating particle from the
sensitive air-passages. As far as time is concerned, there has been more
than enough for these habits to have become innate or converted into
reflex actions; for they are common to most or all of the higher
quadrupeds, and must therefore have been first acquired at a very remote
period. Why the act of clearing the throat is not a reflex action, and
has to be learnt by our children, I cannot pretend to say; but we can
see why blowing the nose on a handkerchief has to be learnt.

It is scarcely credible that the movements of a headless frog, when
it wipes off a drop of acid or other object from its thigh, and which
movements are so well coordinated for a special purpose, were not at
first performed voluntarily, being afterwards rendered easy through
long-continued habit so as at last to be performed unconsciously, or
independently of the cerebral hemispheres.

So again it appears probable that starting was originally acquired by
the habit of jumping away as quickly as possible from danger, whenever
any of our senses gave us warning. Starting, as we have seen, is
accompanied by the blinking of the eyelids so as to protect the eyes,
the most tender and sensitive organs of the body; and it is, I believe,
always accompanied by a sudden and forcible inspiration, which is the
natural preparation for any violent effort. But when a man or horse
starts, his heart beats wildly against his ribs, and here it may be
truly said we have an organ which has never been under the control of
the will, partaking in the general reflex movements of the body. To this
point, however, I shall return in a future chapter.

The contraction of the iris, when the retina is stimulated by a bright
light, is another instance of a movement, which it appears cannot
possibly have been at first voluntarily performed and then fixed by
habit; for the iris is not known to be under the conscious control of
the will in any animal. In such cases some explanation, quite distinct
from habit, will have to be discovered. The radiation of nerve-force
from strongly-excited nerve-cells to other connected cells, as in the
case of a bright light on the retina causing a sneeze, may perhaps aid
us in understanding how some reflex actions originated. A radiation of
nerve-force of this kind, if it caused a movement tending to lessen
the primary irritation, as in the case of the contraction of the iris
preventing too much light from falling on the retina, might afterwards
have been taken advantage of and modified for this special purpose.

It further deserves notice that reflex actions are in all probability
liable to slight variations, as are all corporeal structures and
instincts; and any variations which were beneficial and of sufficient
importance, would tend to be preserved and inherited. Thus reflex
actions, when once gained for one purpose, might afterwards be modified
independently of the will or habit, so as to serve for some distinct
purpose. Such cases would be parallel with those which, as we have every
reason to believe, have occurred with many instincts; for although
some instincts have been developed simply through long-continued and
inherited habit, other highly complex ones have been developed through
the preservation of variations of pre-existing instincts--that is,
through natural selection.

I have discussed at some little length, though as I am well aware, in a
very imperfect manner, the acquirement of reflex actions, because they
are often brought into play in connection with movements expressive of
our emotions; and it was necessary to show that at least some of them
might have been Erst acquired through the will in order to satisfy a
desire, or to relieve a disagreeable sensation.

_Associated habitual movements in the lower animals_.--I have already
given in the case of Man several instances of movements associated with
various states of the mind or body, which are now purposeless, but
which were originally of use, and are still of use under certain
circumstances. As this subject is very important for us, I will here
give a considerable number of analogous facts, with reference to
animals; although many of them are of a very trifling nature. My object
is to show that certain movements were originally performed for a
definite end, and that, under nearly the same circumstances, they are
still pertinaciously performed through habit when not of the least use.
That the tendency in most of the following cases is inherited, we may
infer from such actions being performed in the same manner by all the
individuals, young and old, of he same species. We shall also see
that they are excited by the most diversified, often circuitous, and
sometimes mistaken associations.

Dogs, when they wish to go to sleep on a carpet or other hard surface,
generally turn round and round and scratch the ground with their
fore-paws in a senseless manner, as if they intended to trample down the
grass and scoop out a hollow, as no doubt their wild parents did, when
they lived on open grassy plains or in the woods. Jackals, fennecs, and
other allied animals in the Zoological Gardens, treat their straw in
this manner; but it is a rather odd circumstance that the keepers, after
observing for some months, have never seen the wolves thus behave. A
semi-idiotic dog--and an animal in this condition would be particularly
liable to follow a senseless habit--was observed by a friend to turn
completely round on a carpet thirteen times before going to sleep.


Many carnivorous animals, as they crawl towards their prey and prepare
to rush or spring on it, lower their heads and crouch, partly, as it
would appear, to hide themselves, and partly to get ready for their
rush; and this habit in an exaggerated form has become hereditary in our
pointers and setters. Now I have noticed scores of times that when two
strange dogs meet on an open road, the one which first sees the other,
though at the distance of one or two hundred yards, after the first
glance always lowers its bead, generally crouches a little, or even lies
down; that is, he takes the proper attitude for concealing himself and
for making a rush or spring although the road
is quite open and the distance great. Again, dogs of
all kinds when intently watching and slowly approaching their prey,
frequently keep one of their fore-legs doubled up for a long time, ready
for the next cautious step; and this is eminently characteristic of the
pointer. But from habit they behave in exactly the same manner whenever
their attention is aroused (fig. 4). I have seen a dog at the foot of a
high wall, listening attentively to a sound on the opposite side, with
one leg doubled up; and in this case there could have been no intention
of making a cautious approach.

[Illustration: Small dog watching a cat on a table. Figure 4]

{illust. caption = for making a rush or FIG. 4.--Small dog watching a
cat on a table. From a photograph taken  by Mr. Rejlander.}

Dogs after voiding their excrement often make with all four feet a
few scratches backwards, even on a bare stone pavement, as if for the
purpose of covering up their excrement with earth, in nearly the same
manner as do cats. Wolves and jackals behave in the Zoological Gardens
in exactly the same manner, yet, as I am assured by the keepers, neither
wolves, jackals, nor foxes, when they have the means of doing so, ever
cover up their excrement, any more than do dogs. All these animals,
however, bury superfluous food. Hence, if we rightly understand the
meaning of the above cat-like habit, of which there can be little
doubt, we have a purposeless remnant of an habitual movement, which was
originally followed by some remote progenitor of the dog-genus for a
definite purpose, and which has been retained for a prodigious length of
time.

Dogs and jackals[115] take much pleasure in rolling and rubbing their
necks and backs on carrion. The odour seems delightful to them, though
dogs at least do not eat carrion. Mr. Bartlett has observed wolves for
me, and has given them carrion, but has never seen them roll on it. I
have heard it remarked, and I believe it to be true, that the larger
dogs, which are probably descended from wolves, do not so often roll in
carrion as do smaller dogs, which are probably descended from jackals.
When a piece of brown biscuit is offered to a terrier of mine and she is
not hungry (and I have heard of similar instances), she first tosses
it about and worries it, as if it were a rat or other prey; she then
repeatedly rolls on it precisely as if it were a piece of carrion, and
at last eats it. It would appear that an imaginary relish has to be
given to the distasteful morsel; and to effect this the dog acts in
his habitual manner, as if the biscuit was a live animal or smelt like
carrion, though he knows better than we do that this is not the case.
I have seen this same terrier act in the same manner after killing a
little bird or mouse.

Dogs scratch themselves by a rapid movement of one of their hind-feet;
and when their backs are rubbed with a stick, so strong is the habit,
that they cannot help rapidly scratching the air or the ground in a
useless and ludicrous manner. The terrier just alluded to, when thus
scratched with a stick, will sometimes show her delight by another
habitual movement, namely, by licking the air as if it were my hand.

Horses scratch themselves by nibbling those parts of their bodies which
they can reach with their teeth; but more commonly one horse shows
another where he wants to be scratched, and they then nibble each other.
A friend whose attention I had called to the subject, observed that when
he rubbed his horse's neck, the animal protruded his head, uncovered his
teeth, and moved his jaws, exactly as if nibbling another horse's
neck, for he could never have nibbled his own neck. If a horse is much
tickled, as when curry-combed, his wish to bite something becomes so
intolerably strong, that he will clatter his teeth together, and though
not vicious, bite his groom. At the same time from habit he closely
depresses his ears, so as to protect them from being bitten, as if he
were fighting with another horse.

A horse when eager to start on a journey makes the nearest approach
which he can to the habitual movement of progression by pawing the
ground. Now when horses in their stalls are about to be fed and are
eager for their corn, they paw the pavement or the straw. Two of
my horses thus behave when they see or hear the corn given to
their neighbours. But here we have what may almost be called a true
expression, as pawing the ground is universally recognized as a sign of
eagerness.

Cats cover up their excrements of both kinds with earth; and my
grandfather[117]{sic} saw a kitten scraping ashes over a spoonful of
pure water spilt on the hearth; so that here an habitual or instinctive
action was falsely excited, not by a previous act or by odour, but by
eyesight. It is well known that cats dislike wetting their feet, owing,
it is probable, to their having aboriginally inhabited the dry country
of Egypt; and when they wet their feet they shake them violently. My
daughter poured some water into a glass close to the head of a kitten;
and it immediately shook its feet in the usual manner; so that here we
have an habitual movement falsely excited by an associated sound instead
of by the sense of touch.

Kittens, puppies, young pigs and probably many other young animals,
alternately push with their forefeet against the mammary glands of their
mothers, to excite a freer secretion of milk, or to make it flow. Now it
is very common with young cats, and not at all rare with old cats of
the common and Persian breeds (believed by some naturalists to be
specifically extinct), when comfortably lying on a warm shawl or
other soft substance, to pound it quietly and alternately with their
fore-feet; their toes being spread out and claws slightly protruded,
precisely as when sucking their mother. That it is the same movement is
clearly shown by their often at the same time taking a bit of the shawl
into their mouths and sucking it; generally closing their eyes and
purring from delight. This curious movement is commonly excited only in
association with the sensation of a warm soft surface; but I have seen
an old cat, when pleased by having its back scratched, pounding the air
with its feet in the same manner; so that this action has almost become
the expression of a pleasurable sensation.

Having referred to the act of sucking, I may add that this complex
movement, as well as the alternate protrusion of the fore-feet, are
reflex actions; for they are performed if a finger moistened with milk
is placed in the mouth of a puppy, the front part of whose brain has
been removed.[117] It has recently been stated in France, that the
action of sucking is excited solely through the sense of smell, so that
if the olfactory nerves of a puppy are destroyed, it never sucks. In
like manner the wonderful power which a chicken possesses only a few
hours after being hatched, of picking up small particles of food,
seems to be started into action through the sense of hearing; for with
chickens hatched by artificial heat, a good observer found that "making
a noise with the finger-nail against a board, in imitation of the
hen-mother, first taught them to peck at their meat."[118]

I will give only one other instance of an habitual and purposeless
movement. The Sheldrake (_Tadorna_) feeds on the sands left uncovered
by the tide, and when a worm-cast is discovered, "it begins patting the
ground with its feet, dancing as it were, over the hole;" and this makes
the worm come to the surface. Now Mr. St. John says, that when his tame
Sheldrakes "came to ask for food, they patted the ground in an impatient
and rapid manner."[119] This therefore may almost be considered as their
expression of hunger. Mr. Bartlett informs me that the Flamingo and the
Kagu (_Rhinochetus jubatus_) when anxious to be fed, beat the ground
with their feet in the same odd manner. So again Kingfishers, when they
catch a fish, always beat it until it is killed; and in the Zoological
Gardens they always beat the raw meat, with which they are sometimes
fed, before devouring it.

We have now, I think, sufficiently shown the truth of our first
Principle, namely, that when any sensation, desire, dislike, &c., has
led during a long series of generations to some voluntary movement,
then a tendency to the performance of a similar movement will almost
certainly be excited, whenever the same, or any analogous or associated
sensation &c., although very weak, is experienced; notwithstanding that
the movement in this case may not be of the least use. Such habitual
movements are often, or generally inherited; and they then differ but
little from reflex actions. When we treat of the special expressions
of man, the latter part of our first Principle, as given at the
commencement of this chapter, will be seen to hold good; namely, that
when movements, associated through habit with certain states of the
mind, are partially repressed by the will, the strictly involuntary
muscles, as well as those which are least under the separate control
of the will, are liable still to act; and their action is often highly
expressive. Conversely, when the will is temporarily or permanently
weakened, the voluntary muscles fail before the involuntary. It is a
fact familiar to pathologists, as Sir C. Bell remarks,[120] "that when
debility arises from affection of the brain, the influence is greatest
on those muscles which are, in their natural condition, most under the
command of the will." We shall, also, in our future chapters, consider
another proposition included in our first Principle; namely, that
the checking of one habitual movement sometimes requires other slight
movements; these latter serving as a means of expression.