CHAPTER IX. -- REFLECTION--MEDITATION-ILL-TEMPER--SULKINESS--DETERMINATION.

The act of frowning--Reflection with an effort, or with the
perception of something difficult or disagreeable--Abstracted
meditation--Ill-temper--Moroseness--Obstinacy Sulkiness and
pouting--Decision or determination--The firm closure of the mouth.


THE corrugators, by their contraction, lower the eyebrows and bring them
together, producing vertical furrows on the forehead--that is, a frown.
Sir C. Bell, who erroneously thought that the corrugator was peculiar to
man, ranks it as "the most remarkable muscle of the human face. It
knits the eyebrows with an energetic effort, which unaccountably, but
irresistibly, conveys the idea of mind." Or, as he elsewhere says, "when
the eyebrows are knit, energy of mind is apparent, and there is the
mingling of thought and emotion with the savage and brutal rage of the
mere animal."[901] There is much truth in these remarks, but hardly
the whole truth. Dr. Duchenne has called the corrugator the muscle
of reflection;[902] but this name, without some limitation, cannot be
considered as quite correct.

A man may be absorbed in the deepest thought, and his brow will remain
smooth until he encounters some obstacle in his train of reasoning,
or is interrupted by some disturbance, and then a frown passes like
a shadow over his brow. A half-starved man may think intently how to
obtain food, but he probably will not frown unless he encounters either
in thought or action some difficulty, or finds the food when obtained
nauseous. I have noticed that almost everyone instantly frowns if he
perceives a strange or bad taste in what he is eating. I asked several
persons, without explaining my object, to listen intently to a very
gentle tapping sound, the nature and source of which they all perfectly
knew, and not one frowned; but a man who joined us, and who could not
conceive what we were all doing in profound silence, when asked to
listen, frowned much, though not in an ill-temper, and said he could
not in the least understand what we all wanted. Dr. Piderit[903] who
has published remarks to the same effect, adds that stammerers generally
frown in speaking, and that a man in doing even so trifling a thing as
pulling on a boot, frowns if he finds it too tight. Some persons are
such habitual frowners, that the mere effort of speaking almost always
causes their brows to contract.

Men of all races frown when they are in any way perplexed in thought,
as I infer from the answers which I have received to my queries; but
I framed them badly, confounding absorbed meditation with perplexed
reflection. Nevertheless, it is clear that the Australians, Malays,
Hindoos, and Kafirs of South Africa frown, when they are puzzled.
Dobritzhoffer remarks that the Guaranies of South America on like
occasions knit their brows.[904]

From these considerations, we may conclude that frowning is not the
expression of simple reflection, however profound, or of attention,
however close, but of something difficult or displeasing encountered in
a train of thought or in action. Deep reflection can, however, seldom
be long carried on without some difficulty, so that it will generally be
accompanied by a frown. Hence it is that frowning commonly gives to the
countenance, as Sir C. Bell remarks, an aspect of intellectual energy.
But in order that this effect may be produced, the eyes must be clear
and steady, or they may be cast downwards, as often occurs in deep
thought. The countenance must not be otherwise disturbed, as in the case
of an ill-tempered or peevish man, or of one who shows the effects of
prolonged suffering, with dulled eyes and drooping jaw, or who perceives
a bad taste in his food, or who finds it difficult to perform some
trifling act, such as threading a needle. In these cases a frown may
often be seen, but it will be accompanied by some other expression,
which will entirely prevent the countenance having an appearance of
intellectual energy or of profound thought.

We may now inquire how it is that a frown should express the perception
of something difficult or disagreeable, either in thought or action. In
the same way as naturalists find it advisable to trace the embryological
development of an organ in order fully to understand its structure, so
with the movements of expression it is advisable to follow as nearly
as possible the same plan. The earliest and almost sole expression
seen during the first days of infancy, and then often exhibited is that
displayed during the act of screaming; and screaming is excited, both at
first and for some time afterwards, by every distressing or displeasing
sensation and emotion,--by hunger, pain, anger, jealousy, fear, &c. At
such times the muscles round the eyes are strongly contracted; and this,
as I believe, explains to a large extent the act of frowning during the
remainder of our lives. I repeatedly observed my own infants, from under
the age of one week to that of two or three months, and found that when
a screaming-fit came on gradually, the first sign was the contraction of
the corrugators, which produced a slight frown, quickly followed by
the contraction of the other muscles round the eyes. When an infant is
uncomfortable or unwell, little frowns--as I record in my notes--may
be seen incessantly passing like shadows over its face; these being
generally, but not always, followed sooner or later by a crying-fit. For
instance, I watched for some time a baby, between seven and eight weeks
old, sucking some milk which was cold, and therefore displeasing to him;
and a steady little frown was maintained all the time. This was never
developed into an actual crying-fit, though occasionally every stage of
close approach could be observed.

As the habit of contracting the brows has been followed by infants
during innumerable generations, at the commencement of every crying or
screaming fit, it has become firmly associated with the incipient
sense of something distressing or disagreeable. Hence under similar
circumstances it would be apt to be continued during maturity, although
never then developed into a crying-fit. Screaming or weeping begins to
be voluntarily restrained at an early period of life, whereas frowning
is hardly ever restrained at any age. It is perhaps worth notice that
with children much given to weeping, anything which perplexes their
minds, and which would cause most other children merely to frown,
readily makes them weep. So with certain classes of the insane, any
effort of mind, however slight, which with an habitual frowner would
cause a slight frown, leads to their weeping in an unrestrained manner.
It is not more surprising that the habit of contracting the brows at
the first perception of something distressing, although gained during
infancy, should be retained during the rest of our lives, than that many
other associated habits acquired at an early age should be permanently
retained both by man and the lower animals. For instance, full-grown
cats, when feeling warm and comfortable, often retain the habit of
alternately protruding their fore-feet with extended toes, which habit
they practised for a definite purpose whilst sucking their mothers.

Another and distinct cause has probably strengthened the habit of
frowning, whenever the mind is intent on any subject and encounters some
difficulty. Vision is the most important of all the senses, and during
primeval times the closest attention must have been incessantly:
directed towards distant objects for the sake of obtaining prey and
avoiding danger. I remember being struck, whilst travelling in parts of
South America, which were dangerous from the presence of Indians, how
incessantly, yet as it appeared unconsciously, the half-wild Gauchos
closely scanned the whole horizon. Now, when any one with no covering on
his head (as must have been aboriginally the case with mankind), strives
to the utmost to distinguish in broad daylight, and especially if the
sky is bright, a distant object, he almost invariably contracts his
brows to prevent the entrance of too much light; the lower eyelids,
cheeks, and upper lip being at the same time raised, so as to lessen the
orifice of the eyes. I have purposely asked several persons, young and
old, to look, under the above circumstances, at distant objects, making
them believe that I only wished to test the power of their vision; and
they all behaved in the manner just described. Some of them, also, put
their open, flat hands over their eyes to keep out the excess of light.
Gratiolet, after making some remarks to nearly the same effect,[905]
says, "Ce sont la des attitudes de vision difficile." He concludes that
the muscles round the eyes contract partly for the sake of excluding too
much light (which appears to me the more important end), and partly to
prevent all rays striking the retina, except those which come direct
from the object that is scrutinized. Mr. Bowman, whom I consulted on
this point, thinks that the contraction of the surrounding muscles may,
in addition, "partly sustain the consensual movements of the two eyes,
by giving a firmer support while the globes are brought to binocular
vision by their own proper muscles."

As the effort of viewing with care under a bright light a distant object
is both difficult and irksome, and as this effort has been habitually
accompanied, during numberless generations, by the contraction of the
eyebrows, the habit of frowning will thus have been much strengthened;
although it was originally practised during infancy from a quite
independent cause, namely as the first step in the protection of the
eyes during screaming. There is, indeed, much analogy, as far as the
state of the mind is concerned, between intently scrutinizing a distant
object, and following out an obscure train of thought, or performing
some little and troublesome mechanical work. The belief that the habit
of contracting the brows is continued when there is no need whatever to
exclude too much light, receives support from the cases formerly
alluded to, in which the eyebrows or eyelids are acted on under certain
circumstances in a useless manner, from having been similarly used,
under analogous circumstances, for a serviceable purpose. For instance,
we voluntarily close our eyes when we do not wish to see any object, and
we are apt to close them, when we reject a proposition, as if we could
not or would not see it; or when we think about something horrible.
We raise our eyebrows when we wish to see quickly all round us, and
we often do the same, when we earnestly desire to remember something;
acting as if we endeavoured to see it.


_Abstraction. Meditation_.--When a person is lost in thought with his
mind absent, or, as it is sometimes said, "when he is in a brown study,"
he does not frown, but his eyes appear vacant. The lower eyelids
are generally raised and wrinkled, in the same manner as when a
short-sighted person tries to distinguish a distant object; and the
upper orbicular muscles are at the same time slightly contracted.
The wrinkling of the lower eyelids under these circumstances has been
observed with some savages, as by Mr. Dyson Lacy with the Australians
of Queensland, and several times by Mr. Geach with the Malays of the
interior of Malacca. What the meaning or cause of this action may be,
cannot at present be explained; but here we have another instance of
movement round the eyes in relation to the state of the mind.

The vacant expression of the eyes is very peculiar, and at once shows
when a man is completely lost in thought. Professor Donders has, with
his usual kindness, investigated this subject for me. He has observed
others in this condition, and has been himself observed by Professor
Engelmann. The eyes are not then fixed on any object, and therefore not,
as I had imagined, on some distant object. The lines of vision of the
two eyes even often become slightly divergent; the divergence, if the
head be held vertically, with the plane of vision horizontal, amounting
to an angle of 2'0 as a maximum. This was ascertained by observing the
crossed double image of a distant object. When the head droops forward,
as often occurs with a man absorbed in thought, owing to the general
relaxation of his muscles, if the plane of vision be still horizontal,
the eyes are necessarily a little turned upwards, and then the
divergence is as much as 3'0, or 3'0 5': if the eyes are turned still
more upwards, it amounts to between 6'0 and 7'0. Professor Donders
attributes this divergence to the almost complete relaxation of certain
muscles of the eyes, which would be apt to follow from the mind being
wholly absorbed.[906] The active condition of the muscles of the eyes is
that of convergence; and Professor Donders remarks, as bearing on their
divergence during a period of complete abstraction, that when one eye
becomes blind, it almost always, after a short lapse of time, deviates
outwards; for its muscles are no longer used in moving the eyeball
inwards for the sake of binocular vision.

Perplexed reflection is often accompanied by certain movements or
gestures. At such times we commonly raise our hands to our foreheads,
mouths, or chins; but we do not act thus, as far as I have seen, when we
are quite lost in meditation, and no difficulty is encountered. Plautus,
describing in one of his plays[907] a puzzled man, says, "Now look, he
has pillared his chin upon his hand." Even so trifling and apparently
unmeaning a gesture as the raising of the hand to the face has been
observed with some savages. Al. J. Mansel Weale has seen it with the
Kafirs of South Africa; and the native chief Gaika adds, that men then
"sometimes pull their beards." Mr. Washington Matthews, who attended
to some of the wildest tribes of Indians in the western regions of the
United States, remarks that he has seen them when concentrating their
thoughts, bring their "hands, usually the thumb and index finger, in
contact with some part of the face, commonly the upper lip." We can
understand why the forehead should be pressed or rubbed, as deep thought
tries the brain; but why the hand should be raised to the mouth or face
is far from clear.

_Ill-temper_.--We have seen that frowning is the natural expression of
some difficulty encountered, or of something disagreeable experienced
either in thought or action, and he whose mind is often and readily
affected in this way, will be apt to be ill-tempered, or slightly
angry, or peevish, and will commonly show it by frowning. But a cross
expression, due to a frown, may be counteracted, if the mouth appears
sweet, from being habitually drawn into a smile, and the eyes are bright
and cheerful. So it will be if the eye is clear and steady, and there is
the appearance of earnest reflection. Frowning, with some depression
of the corners of the mouth, which is a sign of grief, gives an air of
peevishness. If a child (see Plate IV., fig. 2)[908] frowns much whilst
crying, but does not strongly contract in the usual manner the orbicular
muscles, a well-marked expression of anger or even of rage, together
with misery, is displayed.

[Illustration: Ill-temper. Plate IV]

If the whole frowning brow be drawn much downward by the contraction of
the pyramidal muscles of the nose, which produces transverse wrinkles
or folds across the base of the nose, the expression becomes one of
moroseness. Duchenne believes that the contraction of this muscle,
without any frowning, gives the appearance of extreme and aggressive
hardness.[909] But I much doubt whether this is a true or natural
expression. I have shown Duchenne's photograph of a young man, with this
muscle strongly contracted by means of galvanism, to eleven persons,
including some artists, and none of them could form an idea what was
intended, except one, a girl, who answered correctly, "surely reserve."
When I first looked at this photograph, knowing what was intended, my
imagination added, as I believe, what was necessary, namely, a frowning
brow; and consequently the expression appeared to me true and extremely
morose.

A firmly closed mouth, in addition to a lowered and frowning brow, gives
determination to the expression, or may make it obstinate and sullen.
How it comes that the firm closure of the mouth gives the appearance
of determination will presently be discussed. An expression of sullen
obstinacy has been clearly recognized by my informants, in the natives
of six different regions of Australia. It is well marked, according to
Mr. Scott, with the Hindoos. It has been recognized with the Malays,
Chinese, Kafirs, Abyssinians, and in a conspicuous degree, according to
Dr. Rothrock, with the wild Indians of North America, and according to
Mr. D. Forbes, with the Aymaras of Bolivia. I have also observed it with
the Araucanos of southern Chili. Mr. Dyson Lacy remarks that the natives
of Australia, when in this frame of mind, sometimes fold their arms
across their breasts, an attitude which may be seen with us. A firm
determination, amounting to obstinacy, is, also, sometimes expressed by
both shoulders being kept raised, the meaning of which gesture will be
explained in the following chapter.

With young children sulkiness is shown by pouting, or, as it is
sometimes called, "making a snout."[910] When the corners of the mouth
are much depressed, the lower lip is a little everted and protruded;
and this is likewise called a pout. But the pouting here referred to,
consists of the protrusion of both lips into a tubular form, sometimes
to such an extent as to project as far as the end of the nose, if this
be short. Pouting is generally accompanied by frowning, and sometimes
by the utterance of a booing or whooing noise. This expression is
remarkable, as almost the sole one, as far as I know, which is exhibited
much more plainly during childhood, at least with Europeans, than during
maturity. There is, however, some tendency to the protrusion of the lips
with the adults of all races under the influence of great rage. Some
children pout when they are shy, and they can then hardly be called
sulky.

From inquiries which I have made in several large families, pouting does
not seem very common with European children; but it prevails throughout
the world, and must be both common and strongly marked with most savage
races, as it has caught the attention of many observers. It has been
noticed in eight different districts of Australia; and one of my
informants remarks how greatly the lips of the children are then
protruded. Two observers have seen pouting with the children of Hindoos;
three, with those of the Kafirs and Fingoes of South Africa, and with
the Hottentots; and two, with the children of the wild Indians of North
America. Pouting has also been observed with the Chinese, Abyssinians,
Malays of Malacca, Dyaks of Borneo, and often with the New Zealanders.
Mr. Mansel Weale informs me that he has seen the lips much protruded,
not only with the children of the Kafirs, but with the adults of both
sexes when sulky; and Mr. Stack has sometimes observed the same thing
with the men, and very frequently with the women of New Zealand. A trace
of the same expression may occasionally be detected even with adult
Europeans.

We thus see that the protrusion of the lips, especially with young
children, is characteristic of sulkiness throughout the greater part of
the world. This movement apparently results from the retention, chiefly
during youth, of a primordial habit, or from an occasional reversion to
it. Young orangs and chimpanzees protrude their lips to an extraordinary
degree, as described in a former chapter, when they are discontented,
somewhat angry, or sulky; also when they are surprised, a little
frightened, and even when slightly pleased. Their mouths are protruded
apparently for the sake of making the various noises proper to
these several states of mind; and its shape, as I observed with the
chimpanzee, differed slightly when the cry of pleasure and that of anger
were uttered. As soon as these animals become enraged, the shape of the
month wholly changes, and the teeth are exposed. The adult orang when
wounded is said to emit "a singular cry, consisting at first of high
notes, which at length deepen into a low roar. While giving out the high
notes he thrusts out his lips into a funnel shape, but in uttering the
low notes he holds his mouth wide open."[911] With the gorilla, the
lower lip is said to be capable of great elongation. If then our
semi-human progenitors protruded their lips when sulky or a little
angered, in the same manner as do the existing anthropoid apes, it
is not an anomalous, though a curious fact, that our children should
exhibit, when similarly affected, a trace of the same expression,
together with some tendency to utter a noise. For it is not at all
unusual for animals to retain, more or less perfectly, during early
youth, and subsequently to lose, characters which were aboriginally
possessed by their adult progenitors, and which are still retained by
distinct species, their near relations.

Nor is it an anomalous fact that the children of savages should exhibit
a stronger tendency to protrude their lips, when sulky, than the
children of civilized Europeans; for the essence of savagery seems
to consist in the retention of a primordial condition, and this
occasionally holds good even with bodily peculiarities.[912] It may be
objected to this view of the origin of pouting, that the anthropoid
apes likewise protrude their lips when astonished and even when a little
pleased; whilst with us this expression is generally confined to a sulky
frame of mind. But we shall see in a future chapter that with men of
various races surprise does sometimes lead to a slight protrusion of the
lips, though great surprise or astonishment is more commonly shown by
the mouth being widely opened. As when we smile or laugh we draw back
the corners of the mouth, we have lost any tendency to protrude the
lips, when pleased, if indeed our early progenitors thus expressed
pleasure.

A little gesture made by sulky children may here be noticed, namely,
their "showing a cold shoulder." This has a different meaning, as, I
believe, from the keeping both shoulders raised. A cross child, sitting
on its parent's knee, will lift up the near shoulder, then jerk it away,
as if from a caress, and afterwards give a backward push with it, as
if to push away the offender. I have seen a child, standing at some
distance from any one, clearly express its feelings by raising one
shoulder, giving it a little backward movement, and then turning away
its whole body.


_Decision or determination_.--The firm closure of the mouth tends to
give an expression of determination or decision to the countenance.
No determined man probably ever had an habitually gaping mouth. Hence,
also, a small and weak lower jaw, which seems to indicate that the
mouth is not habitually and firmly closed, is commonly thought to be
characteristic of feebleness of character. A prolonged effort of any
kind, whether of body or mind, implies previous determination; and if it
can be shown that the mouth is generally closed with firmness before
and during a great and continued exertion of the muscular system, then,
through the principle of association, the mouth would almost certainly
be closed as soon as any determined resolution was taken. Now several
observers have noticed that a man, in commencing any violent muscular
effort, invariably first distends his lungs with air, and then
compresses it by the strong contraction of the muscles of the chest; and
to effect this the mouth must be firmly closed. Moreover, as soon as
the man is compelled to draw breath, he still keeps his chest as much
distended as possible.

Various causes have been assigned for this manner of acting. Sir C.
Bell maintains[913] that the chest is distended with air, and is kept
distended at such times, in order to give a fixed support to the muscles
which are thereto attached. Hence, as he remarks, when two men are
engaged in a deadly contest, a terrible silence prevails, broken only
by hard stifled breathing. There is silence, because to expel the air in
the utterance of any sound would be to relax the support for the muscles
of the arms. If an outcry is heard, supposing the struggle to take
place in the dark, we at once know that one of the two has given up in
despair.

Gratiolet admits[914] that when a man has to struggle with another to
his utmost, or has to support a great weight, or to keep for a long time
the same forced attitude, it is necessary for him first to make a deep
inspiration, and then to cease breathing; but he thinks that Sir C.
Bell's explanation is erroneous. He maintains that arrested respiration
retards the circulation of the blood, of which I believe there is no
doubt, and he adduces some curious evidence from the structure of the
lower animals, showing, on the one hand, that a retarded circulation is
necessary for prolonged muscular exertion, and, on the other hand, that
a rapid circulation is necessary for rapid movements. According to this
view, when we commence any great exertion, we close our mouths and stop
breathing, in order to retard the circulation of the blood. Gratiolet
sums up the subject by saying, "C'est la la vraie theorie de l'effort
continu;" but how far this theory is admitted by other physiologists I
do not know.

Dr. Piderit accounts[915] for the firm closure of the mouth during
strong muscular exertion, on the principle that the influence of the
will spreads to other muscles besides those necessarily brought into
action in making any particular exertion; and it is natural that the
muscles of respiration and of the mouth, from being so habitually used,
should be especially liable to be thus acted on. It appears to me that
there probably is some truth in this view, for we are apt to press the
teeth hard together during violent exertion, and this is not requisite
to prevent expiration, whilst the muscles of the chest are strongly
contracted.

Lastly, when a man has to perform some delicate and difficult operation,
not requiring the exertion of any strength, he nevertheless generally
closes his mouth and ceases for a time to breathe; but he acts thus
in order that the movements of his chest may not disturb, those of his
arms. A person, for instance, whilst threading a needle, may be seen to
compress his lips and either to stop breathing, or to breathe as quietly
as possible. So it was, as formerly stated, with a young and sick
chimpanzee, whilst it amused itself by killing flies with its knuckles,
as they buzzed about on the window-panes. To perform an action, however
trifling, if difficult, implies some amount of previous determination.

There appears nothing improbable in all the above assigned causes having
come into play in different degrees, either conjointly or separately,
on various occasions. The result would be a well-established habit, now
perhaps inherited, of firmly closing the mouth at the commencement
of and during any violent and prolonged exertion, or any delicate
operation. Through the principle of association there would also be
a strong tendency towards this same habit, as soon as the mind had
resolved on any particular action or line of conduct, even before there
was any bodily exertion, or if none were requisite. The habitual and
firm closure of the mouth would thus come to show decision of character;
and decision readily passes into obstinacy.