
CHAPTER VII. -- LOW SPIRITS, ANXIETY, GRIEF, DEJECTION, DESPAIR.

General effect of grief on the system--Obliquity of the eyebrows
under suffering--On the cause of the obliquity of the eyebrows--On the
depression of the corners of the mouth.


AFTER the mind has suffered from an acute paroxysm of grief, and the
cause still continues, we fall into a state of low spirits; or we may be
utterly cast down and dejected. Prolonged bodily pain, if not amounting
to an agony, generally leads to the same state of mind. If we expect to
suffer, we are anxious; if we have no hope of relief, we despair.

Persons suffering from excessive grief often seek relief by violent and
almost frantic movements, as described in a former chapter; but when
their suffering is somewhat mitigated, yet prolonged, they no longer
wish for action, but remain motionless and passive, or may occasionally
rock themselves to and fro. The circulation becomes languid; the face
pale; the muscles flaccid; the eyelids droop; the head hangs on the
contracted chest; the lips, cheeks, and lower jaw all sink downwards
from their own weight. Hence all the features are lengthened; and the
face of a person who hears bad news is said to fall. A party of natives
in Tierra del Fuego endeavoured to explain to us that their friend, the
captain of a sealing vessel, was out of spirits, by pulling down their
cheeks with both hands, so as to make their faces as long as possible.
Mr. Bunnet informs me that the Australian aborigines when out of spirits
have a chop-fallen appearance. After prolonged suffering the eyes become
dull and lack expression, and are often slightly suffused with tears.
The eyebrows not rarely are rendered oblique, which is due to their
inner ends being raised. This produces peculiarly-formed wrinkles on the
forehead, which are very different from those of a simple frown; though
in some cases a frown alone may be present. The comers of the mouth are
drawn downwards, which is so universally recognized as a sign of being
out of spirits, that it is almost proverbial.

The breathing becomes slow and feeble, and is often interrupted by deep
sighs. As Gratiolet remarks, whenever our attention is long concentrated
on any subject, we forget to breathe, and then relieve ourselves by a
deep inspiration; but the sighs of a sorrowful person, owing to his slow
respiration and languid circulation, are eminently characteristic.[701]
As the grief of a person in this state occasionally recurs and increases
into a paroxysm, spasms affect the respiratory muscles, and he feels
as if something, the so-called _globus hystericus_, was rising in his
throat. These spasmodic movements are clearly allied to the sobbing of
children, and are remnants of those severer spasms which occur when a
person is said to choke from excessive grief.[702]


_Obliquity of the eyebrows_.--Two points alone in the above description
require further elucidation, and these are very curious ones; namely,
the raising of the inner ends of the eyebrows, and the drawing down
of the corners of the mouth. With respect to the eyebrows, they may
occasionally be seen to assume an oblique position in persons suffering
from deep dejection or anxiety; for instance, I have observed this
movement in a mother whilst speaking about her sick son; and it is
sometimes excited by quite trifling or momentary causes of real or
pretended distress. The eyebrows assume this position owing to the
contraction of certain muscles (namely, the orbiculars, corrugators, and
pyramidals of the nose, which together tend to lower and contract the
eyebrows) being partially cheeked by the more powerful action of the
central fasciæ of the frontal muscle. These latter fasciæ by their
contraction raise the inner ends alone of the eyebrows; and as the
corrugators at the same time draw the eyebrows together, their inner
ends become puckered into a fold or lump. This fold is a highly
characteristic point in the appearance of the eyebrows when rendered
oblique, as may be seen in figs. 2 and 5, Plate II. The eyebrows are
at the same time somewhat roughened, owing to the hairs being made to
project. Dr. J. Crichton Browne has also often noticed in melancholic
patients who keep their eyebrows persistently oblique, "a peculiar
acute arching of the upper eyelid." A trace of this may be observed by
comparing the right and left eyelids of the young man in the photograph
(fig. 2, Plate II.); for he was not able to act equally on both
eyebrows. This is also shown by the unequal furrows on the two sides of
his forehead. The acute arching of the eyelids depends, I believe, on
the inner end alone of the eyebrows being raised; for when the whole
eyebrow is elevated and arched, the upper eyelid follows in a slight
degree the same movement.

[Illustration:  Obliquity of the eyebrows. Plate II]

But the most conspicuous result of the opposed contraction of the
above-named muscles, is exhibited by the peculiar furrows formed on the
forehead. These muscles, when thus in conjoint yet opposed action, may
be called, for the sake of brevity, the grief-muscles. When a person
elevates his eyebrows by the contraction of the whole frontal muscle,
transverse wrinkles extend across the whole breadth of the forehead;
but in the present case the middle fasciae alone are contracted;
consequently, transverse furrows are formed across the middle part alone
of the forehead. The skin over the exterior parts of both eyebrows is
at the same time drawn downwards and smooth, by the contraction of
the outer portions of the orbicular muscles. The eyebrows are
likewise brought together through the simultaneous contraction of the
corrugators;[703] and this latter action generates vertical furrows,
separating the exterior and lowered part of the skin of the forehead
from the central and raised part. The union of these vertical furrows
with the central and transverse furrows (see figs. 2 and 3) produces a
mark on the forehead which has been compared to a horse-shoe; but the
furrows more strictly form three sides of a quadrangle. They are often
conspicuous on the foreheads of adult or nearly adult persons, when
their eyebrows are made oblique; but with young children, owing to their
skin not easily wrinkling, they are rarely seen, or mere traces of them
can be detected.

These peculiar furrows are best represented in fig. 3, Plate II., on
the forehead of a young lady who has the power in an unusual degree of
voluntarily acting on the requisite muscles. As she was absorbed in the
attempt, whilst being photographed, her expression was not at all one
of grief; I have therefore given the forehead alone. Fig. 1 on the same
plate, copied from Dr. Du-chenne's work,[704] represents, on a reduced
scale, the face, in its natural state, of a young man who was a good
actor. In fig. 2 he is shown simulating grief, but the two eyebrows, as
before remarked, are not equally acted on. That the expression is true,
may be inferred from the fact that out of fifteen persons, to whom the
original photograph was shown, without any clue to what was intended
being given them, fourteen immediately answered, "despairing sorrow,"
"suffering endurance," "melancholy," and so forth. The history of fig. 5
is rather curious: I saw the photograph in a shop-window, and took it
to Mr. Rejlander for the sake of finding out by whom it had been made;
remarking to him how pathetic the expression was. He answered, "I made
it, and it was likely to be pathetic, for the boy in a few minutes burst
out crying." He then showed me a photograph of the same boy in a placid
state, which I have had (fig. 4) reproduced. In fig. 6, a trace of
obliquity in the eyebrows may be detected; but this figure, as well as
fig. 7, is given to show the depression of the corners of the mouth, to
which subject I shall presently refer.

Few persons, without some practice, can voluntarily act on their
grief-muscles; but after repeated trials a considerable number succeed,
whilst others never can. The degree of obliquity in the eyebrows,
whether assumed voluntarily or unconsciously, differs much in different
persons. With some who apparently have unusually strong pyramidal
muscles, the contraction of the central fasciae of the frontal muscle,
although it may be energetic, as shown by the quadrangular furrows on
the forehead, does not raise the inner ends of the eyebrows, but only
prevents their being so much lowered as they otherwise would have been.
As far as I have been able to observe, the grief-muscles are brought
into action much more frequently by children and women than by men. They
are rarely acted on, at least with grown-up persons, from bodily pain,
but almost exclusively from mental distress. Two persons who, after some
practice, succeeded in acting on their grief-muscles, found by
looking at a mirror that when they made their eyebrows oblique, they
unintentionally at the same time depressed the corners of their mouths;
and this is often the case when the expression is naturally assumed.

The power to bring the grief-muscles freely into play appears to be
hereditary, like almost every other human faculty. A lady belonging to
a family famous for having produced an extraordinary number of great
actors and actresses, and who can herself give this expression "with
singular precision," told Dr. Crichton Browne that all her family had
possessed the power in a remarkable degree. The same hereditary tendency
is said to have extended, as I likewise hear from Dr. Browne, to the
last descendant of the family, which gave rise to Sir Walter Scott's
novel of 'Red Gauntlet;' but the hero is described as contracting his
forehead into a horseshoe mark from any strong emotion. I have also seen
a young woman whose forehead seemed almost habitually thus contracted,
independently of any emotion being at the time felt.

The grief-muscles are not very frequently brought into play; and as the
action is often momentary, it easily escapes observation. Although the
expression, when observed, is universally and instantly recognized as
that of grief or anxiety, yet not one person out of a thousand who has
never studied the subject, is able to say precisely what change passes
over the sufferer's face. Hence probably it is that this expression is
not even alluded to, as far as I have noticed, in any work of fiction,
with the exception of 'Red Gauntlet' and of one other novel; and the
authoress of the latter, as I am informed, belongs to the famous family
of actors just alluded to; so that her attention may have been specially
called to the subject.

The ancient Greek sculptors were familiar with the expression, as shown
in the statues of the Laocoon and Arretino; but, as Duchenne remarks,
they carried the transverse furrows across the whole breadth of the
forehead, and thus committed a great anatomical mistake: this is
likewise the case in some modern statues. It is, however, more probable
that these wonderfully accurate observers intentionally sacrificed truth
for the sake of beauty, than that they made a mistake; for rectangular
furrows on the forehead would not have had a grand appearance on the
marble. The expression, in its fully developed condition, is, as far as
I can discover, not often represented in pictures by the old masters, no
doubt owing to the same cause; but a lady who is perfectly familiar with
this expression, informs me that in Fra Angelico's 'Descent from the
Cross' in Florence, it is clearly exhibited in one of the figures on the
right-hand; and I could add a few other instances.

Dr. Crichton Browne, at my request, closely attended to this expression
in the numerous insane patients under his care in the West Biding
Asylum; and he is familiar with Duchenne's photographs of the action
of the grief-muscles. He informs me that they may constantly be seen
in energetic action in cases of melancholia, and especially of
hypochondria; and that the persistent lines or furrows, due to their
habitual contraction, are characteristic of the physiognomy of the
insane belonging to these two classes. Dr. Browne carefully observed for
me during a considerable period three cases of hypochondria, in which
the grief-muscles were persistently contracted. In one of these, a
widow, aged 51, fancied that she had lost all her viscera, and that her
whole body was empty. She wore an expression of great distress, and beat
her semi-closed hands rhythmically together for hours. The grief-muscles
were permanently contracted, and the upper eyelids arched. This
condition lasted for months; she then recovered, and her countenance
resumed its natural expression. A second case presented nearly the
same peculiarities, with the addition that the comers of the mouth were
depressed.

Mr. Patrick Nicol has also kindly observed for me several cases in the
Sussex Lunatic Asylum, and has communicated to me full details with
respect to three of them; but they need not here be given. From his
observations on melancholic patients, Mr. Nicol concludes that the inner
ends of the eyebrows are almost always more or less raised, with the
wrinkles on the forehead more or less plainly marked. In the case of one
young woman, these wrinkles were observed to be in constant slight play
or movement. In some cases the comers of the mouth are depressed,
but often only in a slight degree. Some amount of difference in the
expression of the several melancholic patients could almost always be
observed. The eyelids generally droop; and the skin near their outer
comers and beneath them is wrinkled. The naso-labial fold, which runs
from the wings of the nostrils to the comers of the mouth, and which is
so conspicuous in blubbering children, is often plainly marked in these
patients.

Although with the insane the grief-muscles often act persistently;
yet in ordinary cases they are sometimes brought unconsciously into
momentary action by ludicrously slight causes. A gentleman rewarded a
young lady by an absurdly small present; she pretended to be offended,
and as she upbraided him, her eyebrows became extremely oblique, with
the forehead properly wrinkled. Another young lady and a youth, both in
the highest spirits, were eagerly talking together with extraordinary
rapidity; and I noticed that, as often as the young lady was beaten,
and could not get out her words fast enough, her eyebrows went obliquely
upwards, and rectangular furrows were formed on her forehead. She thus
each time hoisted a flag of distress; and this she did half-a-dozen
times in the course of a few minutes. I made no remark on the subject,
but on a subsequent occasion I asked her to act on her grief-muscles;
another girl who was present, and who could do so voluntarily, showing
her what was intended. She tried repeatedly, but utterly failed; yet
so slight a cause of distress as not being able to talk quickly enough,
sufficed to bring these muscles over and over again into energetic
action.

The expression of grief, due to the contraction of the grief-muscles, is
by no means confined to Europeans, but appears to be common to all the
races of mankind. I have, at least, received trustworthy accounts in
regard to Hindoos, Dhangars (one of the aboriginal hill-tribes of India,
and therefore belonging to a quite distinct race from the Hindoos),
Malays, Negroes and Australians. With respect to the latter, two
observers answer my query in the affirmative, but enter into no details.
Mr. Taplin, however, appends to my descriptive remarks the words
"this is exact." With respect to negroes, the lady who told me of Fra
Angelico's picture, saw a negro towing a boat on the Nile, and as he
encountered an obstruction, she observed his grief-muscles in strong
action, with the middle of the forehead well wrinkled. Mr. Geach watched
a Malay man in Malacca, with the comers of his mouth much depressed,
the eyebrows oblique, with deep short grooves on the forehead. This
expression lasted for a very short time; and Mr. Geach remarks it "was
a strange one, very much like a person about to cry at some great loss."

In India Mr. H. Erskine found that the natives were familiar with this
expression; and Mr. J. Scott, of the Botanic Gardens, Calcutta, has
obligingly sent me a full description of two cases. He observed during
some time, himself unseen, a very young Dhangar woman from Nag-pore, the
wife of one of the gardeners, nursing her baby who was at the point of
death; and he distinctly saw the eyebrows raised at the inner comers,
the eyelids drooping, the forehead wrinkled in the middle, the mouth
slightly open, with the comers much depressed. He then came from behind
a screen of plants and spoke to the poor woman, who started, burst into
a bitter flood of tears, and besought him to cure her baby. The second
case was that of a Hindustani man, who from illness and poverty was
compelled to sell his favourite goat. After receiving the money, he
repeatedly looked at the money in his hand and then at the goat, as if
doubting whether he would not return it. He went to the goat, which was
tied up ready to be led away, and the animal reared up and licked his
hands. His eyes then wavered from side to side; his "mouth was partially
closed, with the corners very decidedly depressed." At last the poor man
seemed to make up his mind that he must part with his goat, and then,
as Mr. Scott saw, the eyebrows became slightly oblique, with the
characteristic puckering or swelling at the inner ends, but the wrinkles
on the forehead were not present. The man stood thus for a minute, then
heaving a deep sigh, burst into tears, raised up his two hands, blessed
the goat, turned round, and without looking again, went away.


_On the cause of the obliquity of the eyebrows under suffering_.--During
several years no expression seemed to me so utterly perplexing as this
which we are here considering. Why should grief or anxiety cause the
central fasciae alone of the frontal muscle together with those round
the eyes, to contract? Here we seem to have a complex movement for the
sole purpose of expressing grief; and yet it is a comparatively rare
expression, and often overlooked. I believe the explanation is not so
difficult as it at first appears. Dr. Duchenne gives a photograph of the
young man before referred to, who, when looking upwards at a strongly
illuminated surface, involuntarily contracted his grief-muscles in an
exaggerated manner. I had entirely forgotten this photograph, when on
a very bright day with the sun behind me, I met, whilst on horseback, a
girl whose eyebrows, as she looked up at me, became extremely oblique,
with the proper furrows on her forehead. I have observed the same
movement under similar circumstances on several subsequent occasions. On
my return home I made three of my children, without giving them any
clue to my object, look as long and as attentively as they could, at the
summit of a tall tree standing against an extremely bright sky. With
all three, the orbicular, corrugator, and pyramidal muscles were
energetically contracted, through reflex action, from the excitement of
the retina, so that their eyes might be protected from the bright light.
But they tried their utmost to look upwards; and now a curious struggle,
with spasmodic twitchings, could be observed between the whole or only
the central portion of the frontal muscle, and the several muscles
which serve to lower the eyebrows and close the eyelids. The involuntary
contraction of the pyramidal caused the basal part of their noses to
be transversely and deeply wrinkled. In one of the three children, the
whole eyebrows were momentarily raised and lowered by the alternate
contraction of the whole frontal muscle and of the muscles surrounding
the eyes, so that the whole breadth of the forehead was alternately
wrinkled and smoothed. In the other two children the forehead became
wrinkled in the middle part alone, rectangular furrows being thus
produced; and the eyebrows were rendered oblique, with their inner
extremities puckered and swollen,--in the one child in a slight degree,
in the other in a strongly marked manner. This difference in the
obliquity of the eyebrows apparently depended on a difference in their
general mobility, and in the strength of the pyramidal muscles. In both
these cases the eyebrows and forehead were acted on under the influence
of a strong light, in precisely the same manner, in every characteristic
detail, as under the influence of grief or anxiety.

Duchenne states that the pyramidal muscle of the nose is less under
the control of the will than are the other muscles round the eyes. He
remarks that the young man who could so well act on his grief-muscles,
as well as on most of his other facial muscles, could not contract the
pyramidals.[705] This power, however, no doubt differs in different
persons. The pyramidal muscle serves to draw down the skin of the
forehead between the eyebrows, together with their inner extremities.
The central fasciae of the frontal are the antagonists of the pyramidal;
and if the action of the latter is to be specially checked, these
central fasciae must be contracted. So that with persons having powerful
pyramidal muscles, if there is under the influence of a bright light an
unconscious desire to prevent the lowering of the eyebrows, the central
fasciae of the frontal muscle must be brought into play; and their
contraction, if sufficiently strong to overmaster the pyramidals,
together with the contraction of the corrugator and orbicular muscles,
will act in the manner just described on the eyebrows and forehead.

When children scream or cry out, they contract, as we know, the
orbicular, corrugator, and pyramidal muscles, primarily for the sake of
compressing their eyes, and thus protecting them from being gorged with
blood, and secondarily through habit. I therefore expected to find with
children, that when they endeavoured either to prevent a crying-fit from
coming on, or to stop crying, they would cheek the contraction of the
above-named muscles, in the same manner as when looking upwards at a
bright light; and consequently that the central fasciae of the frontal
muscle would often be brought into play. Accordingly, I began myself to
observe children at such times, and asked others, including some medical
men, to do the same. It is necessary to observe carefully, as the
peculiar opposed action of these muscles is not nearly so plain in
children, owing to their foreheads not easily wrinkling, as in adults.
But I soon found that the grief-muscles were very frequently brought
into distinct action on these occasions. It would be superfluous to give
all the cases which have been observed; and I will specify only a few.
A little girl, a year and a half old, was teased by some other children,
and before bursting into tears her eyebrows became decidedly oblique.
With an older girl the same obliquity was observed, with the inner ends
of the eyebrows plainly puckered; and at the same time the corners of
the mouth were drawn downwards. As soon as she burst into tears, the
features all changed and this peculiar expression vanished. Again,
after a little boy had been vaccinated, which made him scream and cry
violently, the surgeon gave him an orange brought for the purpose, and
this pleased the child much; as he stopped crying all the characteristic
movements were observed, including the formation of rectangular wrinkles
in the middle of the forehead. Lastly, I met on the road a little girl
three or four years old, who had been frightened by a dog, and when I
asked her what was the matter, she stopped whimpering, and her eyebrows
instantly became oblique to an extraordinary degree.

Here then, as I cannot doubt, we have the key to the problem why the
central fasciae of the frontal muscle and the muscles round the
eyes contract in opposition to each other under the influence of
grief;--whether their contraction be prolonged, as with the melancholic
insane, or momentary, from some trifling cause of distress. We have all
of us, as infants, repeatedly contracted our orbicular, corrugator, and
pyramidal muscles, in order to protect our eyes whilst screaming; our
progenitors before us have done the same during many generations; and
though with advancing years we easily prevent, when feeling distressed,
the utterance of screams, we cannot from long habit always prevent a
slight contraction of the above-named muscles; nor indeed do we observe
their contraction in ourselves, or attempt to stop it, if slight. But
the pyramidal muscles seem to be less under the command of the will
than the other related muscles; and if they be well developed, their
contraction can be checked only by the antagonistic contraction of the
central fasciae of the frontal muscle. The result which necessarily
follows, if these fasciae contract energetically, is the oblique drawing
up of the eyebrows, the puckering of their inner ends, and the formation
of rectangular furrows on the middle of the forehead. As children and
women cry much more freely than men, and as grown-up persons of both
sexes rarely weep except from mental distress, we can understand why the
grief-muscles are more frequently seen in action, as I believe to be
the case, with children and women than with men; and with adults of both
sexes from mental distress alone. In some of the cases before recorded,
as in that of the poor Dhangar woman and of the Hindustani man, the
action of the grief-muscles was quickly followed by bitter weeping. In
all cases of distress, whether great or small, our brains tend through
long habit to send an order to certain muscles to contract, as if we
were still infants on the point of screaming out; but this order we, by
the wondrous power of the will, and through habit, are able partially to
counteract; although this is effected unconsciously, as far as the means
of counteraction are concerned.


_On the depression of the corners of the mouth_.--This action is
effected by the _depressores anguili oris_ (see letter K in figs. 1
and 2). The fibres of this muscle diverge downwards, with the upper
convergent ends attached round the angles of the mouth, and to the lower
lip a little way within the angles.[706] Some of the fibres appear to
be antagonistic to the great zygomatic muscle, and others to the several
muscles running to the outer part of the upper lip. The contraction
of this muscle draws downwards and outwards the corners of the mouth,
including the outer part of the upper lip, and even in a slight degree
the wings of the nostrils. When the mouth is closed and this muscle
acts, the commissure or line of junction of the two lips forms a curved
line with the concavity downwards,[707] and the lips themselves are
generally somewhat protruded, especially the lower one. The mouth in
this state is well represented in the two photographs (Plate II., figs.
6 and 7) by Mr. Rejlander. The upper boy (fig. 6) had just stopped
crying, after receiving a slap on the face from another boy; and the
right moment was seized for photographing him.

The expression of low spirits, grief or dejection, due to the
contraction of this muscle has been noticed by every one who has
written on the subject. To say that a person "is down in the mouth," is
synonymous with saying that he is out of spirits. The depression of the
corners may often be seen, as already stated on the authority of Dr.
Crichton Browne and Mr. Nicol, with the melancholic insane, and was well
exhibited in some photographs sent to me by the former gentleman, of
patients with a strong tendency to suicide. It has been observed
with men belonging to various races, namely with Hindoos, the dark
hill-tribes of India, Malays, and, as the Rev. Mr. Hagenauer informs me,
with the aborigines of Australia.

When infants scream they firmly contract the muscles round their eyes,
and this draws up the upper lip; and as they have to keep their mouths
widely open, the depressor muscles running to the corners are likewise
brought into strong action. This generally, but not invariably, causes a
slight angular bend in the lower lip on both sides, near the corners of
the mouth. The result of the upper and lower lip being thus acted on
is that the mouth assumes a squarish outline. The contraction of the
depressor muscle is best seen in infants when not screaming violently,
and especially just before they begin, or when they cease to scream.
Their little faces then acquire an extremely piteous expression, as I
continually observed with my own infants between the ages of about
six weeks and two or three months. Sometimes, when they are struggling
against a crying-fit, the outline of the mouth is curved in so
exaggerated a manner as to be like a horseshoe; and the expression of
misery then becomes a ludicrous caricature.

The explanation of the contraction of this muscle, under the influence
of low spirits or dejection, apparently follows from the same general
principles as in the case of the obliquity of the eyebrows. Dr. Duchenne
informs me that he concludes from his observations, now prolonged during
many years, that this is one of the facial muscles which is least under
the control of the will. This fact may indeed be inferred from what has
just been stated with respect to infants when doubtfully beginning to
cry, or endeavouring to stop crying; for they then generally command all
the other facial muscles more effectually than they do the depressors of
the corners of the mouth. Two excellent observers who had no theory on
the subject, one of them a surgeon, carefully watched for me some older
children and women as with some opposed struggling they very gradually
approached the point of bursting out into tears; and both observers felt
sure that the depressors began to act before any of the other muscles.
Now as the depressors have been repeatedly brought into strong action
during infancy in many generations, nerve-force will tend to flow, on
the principle of long associated habit, to these muscles as well as
to various other facial muscles, whenever in after life even a slight
feeling of distress is experienced. But as the depressors are somewhat
less under the control of the will than most of the other muscles, we
might expect that they would often slightly contract, whilst the others
remained passive. It is remarkable how small a depression of the corners
of the mouth gives to the countenance an expression of low spirits or
dejection, so that an extremely slight contraction of these muscles
would be sufficient to betray this state of mind.

I may here mention a trifling observation, as it will serve to sum
up our present subject. An old lady with a comfortable but absorbed
expression sat nearly opposite to me in a railway carriage. Whilst I
was looking at her, I saw that her _depressores anguli oris_ became very
slightly, yet decidedly, contracted; but as her countenance remained as
placid as ever, I reflected how meaningless was this contraction, and
how easily one might be deceived. The thought had hardly occurred to me
when I saw that her eyes suddenly became suffused with tears almost to
overflowing, and her whole countenance fell. There could now be no doubt
that some painful recollection, perhaps that of a long-lost child, was
passing through her mind. As soon as her sensorium was thus affected,
certain nerve-cells from long habit instantly transmitted an order to
all the respiratory muscles, and to those round the mouth, to prepare
for a fit of crying. But the order was countermanded by the will, or
rather by a later acquired habit, and all the muscles were obedient,
excepting in a slight degree the _depressores anguli oris_. The mouth
was not even opened; the respiration was not hurried; and no muscle was
affected except those which draw down the corners of the mouth.

As soon as the mouth of this lady began, involuntarily and unconsciously
on her part, to assume the proper form for a crying-fit, we may feel
almost sure that some nerve-influence would have been transmitted
through the long accustomed channels to the various respiratory muscles,
as well as to those round the eyes, and to the vaso-motor centre which
governs the supply of blood sent to the lacrymal glands. Of this
latter fact we have indeed clear evidence in her eyes becoming slightly
suffused with tears; and we can understand this, as the lacrymal glands
are less under the control of the will than the facial muscles. No doubt
there existed at the same time some tendency in the muscles round the
eyes at contract, as if for the sake of protecting them from being
gorged with blood, but this contraction was completely overmastered,
and her brow remained unruffled. Had the pyramidal, corrugator, and
orbicular muscles been as little obedient to the will, as they are
in many persons, they would have been slightly acted on; and then
the central fasciae of the frontal muscle would have contracted in
antagonism, and her eyebrows would have become oblique, with rectangular
furrows on her forehead. Her countenance would then have expressed still
more plainly than it did a state of dejection, or rather one of grief.

Through steps such as these we can understand how it is, that as soon
as some melancholy thought passes through the brain, there occurs a
just perceptible drawing down of the corners of the mouth, or a
slight raising up of the inner ends of the eyebrows, or both movements
combined, and immediately afterwards a slight suffusion of tears. A
thrill of nerve-force is transmitted along several habitual channels,
and produces an effect on any point where the will has not acquired
through long habit much power of interference. The above actions may be
considered as rudimental vestiges of the screaming-fits, which are so
frequent and prolonged during infancy. In this case, as well as in many
others, the links are indeed wonderful which connect cause and effect
in giving rise to various expressions on the human countenance; and they
explain to us the meaning of certain movements, which we involuntarily
and unconsciously perform, whenever certain transitory emotions pass
through our minds.
