CHAPTER VIII. -- JOY, HIGH SPIRITS, LOVE, TENDER FEELINGS, DEVOTION.

Laughter primarily the expression of joy--Ludicrous ideas--Movements
of the features during laughter--Nature of the sound produced--The
secretion of tears during loud laughter--Gradation from loud laughter
to gentle smiling--High spirits--The expression of love--Tender
feelings--Devotion.


JOY, when intense, leads to various purposeless movements--to dancing
about, clapping the hands, stamping, &c., and to loud laughter. Laughter
seems primarily to be the expression of mere joy or happiness. We
clearly see this in children at play, who are almost incessantly
laughing. With young persons past childhood, when they are in high
spirits, there is always much meaningless laughter. The laughter of the
gods is described by Homer as "the exuberance of their celestial joy
after their daily banquet." A man smiles--and smiling, as we shall see,
graduates into laughter--at meeting an old friend in the street, as he
does at any trifling pleasure, such as smelling a sweet perfume.[801]
Laura Bridgman, from her blindness and deafness, could not have acquired
any expression through imitation, yet when a letter from a beloved
friend was communicated to her by gesture-language, she "laughed and
clapped her hands, and the colour mounted to her cheeks." On other
occasions she has been seen to stamp for joy.[802]

Idiots and imbecile persons likewise afford good evidence that laughter
or smiling primarily expresses mere happiness or joy. Dr. Crichton
Browne, to whom, as on so many other occasions, I am indebted for the
results of his wide experience, informs me that with idiots laughter is
the most prevalent and frequent of all the emotional expressions. Many
idiots are morose, passionate, restless, in a painful state of mind,
or utterly stolid, and these never laugh. Others frequently laugh in
a quite senseless manner. Thus an idiot boy, incapable of speech,
complained to Dr. Browne, by the aid of signs, that another boy in
the asylum had given him a black eye; and this was accompanied by
"explosions of laughter and with his face covered with the broadest
smiles." There is another large class of idiots who are persistently
joyous and benign, and who are constantly laughing or smiling.[803]
Their countenances often exhibit a stereotyped smile; their joyousness
is increased, and they grin, chuckle, or giggle, whenever food is placed
before them, or when they are caressed, are shown bright colours, or
hear music. Some of them laugh more than usual when they walk about, or
attempt any muscular exertion. The joyousness of most of these idiots
cannot possibly be associated, as Dr. Browne remarks, with any distinct
ideas: they simply feel pleasure, and express it by laughter or smiles.
With imbeciles rather higher in the scale, personal vanity seems to be
the commonest cause of laughter, and next to this, pleasure arising from
the approbation of their conduct.

With grown-up persons laughter is excited by causes considerably
different from those which suffice during childhood; but this remark
hardly applies to smiling. Laughter in this respect is analogous with
weeping, which with adults is almost confined to mental distress, whilst
with children it is excited by bodily pain or any suffering, as well
as by fear or rage. Many curious discussions have been written on the
causes of laughter with grown-up persons. The subject is extremely
complex. Something incongruous or unaccountable, exciting surprise and
some sense of superiority in the laugher, who must be in a happy frame
of mind, seems to be the commonest cause.[804] The circumstances must
not be of a momentous nature: no poor man would laugh or smile on
suddenly hearing that a large fortune had been bequeathed to him. If
the mind is strongly excited by pleasurable feelings, and any little
unexpected event or thought occurs, then, as Mr. Herbert Spencer
remarks,[805] "a large amount of nervous energy, instead of being
allowed to expend itself in producing an equivalent amount of the new
thoughts and emotion which were nascent, is suddenly checked in its
flow."... "The excess must discharge itself in some other direction, and
there results an efflux through the motor nerves to various classes of
the muscles, producing the half-convulsive actions we term laughter." An
observation, bearing on this point, was made by a correspondent during
the recent siege of Paris, namely, that the German soldiers, after
strong excitement from exposure to extreme danger, were particularly
apt to burst out into loud laughter at the smallest joke. So again
when young children are just beginning to cry, an unexpected event will
sometimes suddenly turn their crying into laughter, which apparently
serves equally well to expend their superfluous nervous energy.

The imagination is sometimes said to be tickled by a ludicrous idea; and
this so-called tickling of the mind is curiously analogous with that of
the body. Every one knows how immoderately children laugh, and how their
whole bodies are convulsed when they are tickled. The anthropoid apes,
as we have seen, likewise utter a reiterated sound, corresponding with
our laughter, when they are tickled, especially under the armpits. I
touched with a bit of paper the sole of the foot of one of my infants,
when only seven days old, and it was suddenly jerked away and the toes
curled about, as in an older child. Such movements, as well as laughter
from being tickled, are manifestly reflex actions; and this is likewise
shown by the minute unstriped muscles, which serve to erect the separate
hairs on the body, contracting near a tickled surface.[806] Yet laughter
from a ludicrous idea, though involuntary, cannot be called a strictly
reflex action. In this case, and in that of laughter from being tickled,
the mind must be in a pleasurable condition; a young child, if tickled
by a strange man, would scream from fear. The touch must be light, and
an idea or event, to be ludicrous, must not be of grave import. The
parts of the body which are most easily tickled are those which are not
commonly touched, such as the armpits or between the toes, or parts
such as the soles of the feet, which are habitually touched by a broad
surface; but the surface on which we sit offers a marked exception to
this rule. According to Gratiolet,[807] certain nerves are much more
sensitive to tickling than others. From the fact that a child can hardly
tickle itself, or in a much less degree than when tickled by another
person, it seems that the precise point to be touched must not be known;
so with the mind, something unexpected--a novel or incongruous idea
which breaks through an habitual train of thought--appears to be a
strong element in the ludicrous.

The sound of laughter is produced by a deep inspiration followed by
short, interrupted, spasmodic contractions of the chest, and especially
of the diaphragm.[808] Hence we hear of "laughter holding both his
sides." From the shaking of the body, the head nods to and fro. The
lower jaw often quivers up and down, as is likewise the case with some
species of baboons, when they are much pleased.

[Illustration: Moderate laughter and smiling. Plate III]

During laughter the mouth is opened more or less widely, with the
corners drawn much backwards, as well as a little upwards; and the upper
lip is somewhat raised. The drawing back of the corners is best seen in
moderate laughter, and especially in a broad smile--the latter epithet
showing how the mouth is widened. In the accompanying figs. 1-3, Plate
III., different degrees of moderate laughter and smiling have been
photographed. The figure of the little girl, with the hat is by Dr.
Wallich, and the expression was a genuine one; the other two are by Mr.
Rejlander. Dr. Duchenne repeatedly insists[809] that, under the emotion
of joy, the mouth is acted on exclusively by the great zygomatic
muscles, which serve to draw the corners backwards and upwards; but
judging from the manner in which the upper teeth are always exposed
during laughter and broad smiling, as well as from my own sensations,
I cannot doubt that some of the muscles running to the upper lip are
likewise brought into moderate action. The upper and lower orbicular
muscles of the eyes are at the same time more or less contracted; and
there is an intimate connection, as explained in the chapter on weeping,
between the orbiculars, especially the lower ones and some of the
muscles running to the upper lip. Henle remarks[810] on this head, that
when a man closely shuts one eye he cannot avoid retracting the upper
lip on the same side; conversely, if any one will place his finger
on his lower eyelid, and then uncover his upper incisors as much as
possible, he will feel, as his upper lip is drawn strongly upwards, that
the muscles of the lower eyelid contract. In Henle's drawing, given in
woodcut, fig. 2, the _musculus malaris_ (H) which runs to the upper
lip may be seen to form an almost integral part of the lower orbicular
muscle.

Dr. Duchenne has given a large photograph of an old man (reduced on
Plate III. fig 4), in his usual passive condition, and another of
the same man (fig. 5), naturally smiling. The latter was instantly
recognized by every one to whom it was shown as true to nature. He
has also given, as an example of an unnatural or false smile, another
photograph (fig. 6) of the same old man, with the corners of his mouth
strongly retracted by the galvanization of the great zygomatic
muscles. That the expression is not natural is clear, for I showed this
photograph to twenty-four persons, of whom three could not in the least
tell what was meant, whilst the others, though they perceived that the
expression was of the nature of a smile, answered in such words as "a
wicked joke," "trying to laugh," "grinning laughter.... half-amazed
laughter," &c. Dr. Duchenne attributes the falseness of the expression
altogether to the orbicular muscles of the lower eyelids not being
sufficiently contracted; for he justly lays great stress on their
contraction in the expression of joy. No doubt there is much truth
in this view, but not, as it appears to me, the whole truth. The
contraction of the lower orbiculars is always accompanied, as we have
seen, by the drawing up of the upper lip. Had the upper lip, in fig.
6, been thus acted on to a slight extent, its curvature would have been
less rigid, the naso-labial farrow would have been slightly different,
and the whole expression would, as I believe, have been more natural,
independently of the more conspicuous effect from the stronger
contraction of the lower eyelids. The corruptor muscle, moreover, in
fig. 6, is too much contracted, causing a frown; and this muscle never
acts under the influence of joy except during strongly pronounced or
violent laughter.

By the drawing backwards and upwards of the corners of the mouth,
through the contraction of the great zygomatic muscles, and by the
raising of the upper lip, the cheeks are drawn upwards. Wrinkles are
thus formed under the eyes, and, with old people, at their outer ends;
and these are highly characteristic of laughter or smiling. As a gentle
smile increases into a strong one, or into a laugh, every one may feel
and see, if he will attend to his own sensations and look at himself
in a mirror, that as the upper lip is drawn up and the lower orbiculars
contract, the wrinkles in the lower eyelids and those beneath the
eyes are much strengthened or increased. At the same time, as I have
repeatedly observed, the eyebrows are slightly lowered, which shows
that the upper as well as the lower orbiculars contract at least to some
degree, though this passes unperecived, as far as our sensations
are concerned. If the original photograph of the old man, with his
countenance in its usual placid state (fig. 4), be compared with that
(fig. 5) in which he is naturally smiling, it may be seen that the
eyebrows in the latter are a little lowered. I presume that this is
owing to the upper orbiculars being impelled, through the force of
long-associated habit, to act to a certain extent in concert with the
lower orbiculars, which themselves contract in connection with the
drawing up of the upper lip.

The tendency in the zygomatic muscles to contract under pleasurable
emotions is shown by a curious fact, communicated to me by Dr. Browne,
with respect to patients suffering from GENERAL PARALYSIS OF
THE INSANE.[811] "In this malady there is almost invariably
optimism--delusions as to wealth, rank, grandeur--insane joyousness,
benevolence, and profusion, while its very earliest physical symptom is
trembling at the corners of the mouth and at the outer corners of the
eyes. This is a well-recognized fact. Constant tremulous agitation of
the inferior palpebral and great zygomatic muscles is pathognomic of the
earlier stages of general paralysis. The countenance has a pleased and
benevolent expression. As the disease advances other muscles become
involved, but until complete fatuity is reached, the prevailing
expression is that of feeble benevolence."

As in laughing and broadly smiling the cheeks and upper lip are much
raised, the nose appears to be shortened, and the skin on the bridge
becomes finely wrinkled in transverse lines, with other oblique
longitudinal lines on the sides. The upper front teeth are commonly
exposed. A well-marked naso-labial fold is formed, which runs from the
wing of each nostril to the corner of the mouth; and this fold is often
double in old persons.

A bright and sparkling eye is as characteristic of a pleased or amused
state of mind, as is the retraction of the corners of the mouth
and upper lip with the wrinkles thus produced. Even the eyes of
microcephalous idiots, who are so degraded that they never learn to
speak, brighten slightly when they are pleased.[812] Under extreme
laughter the eyes are too much suffused with tears to sparkle; but the
moisture squeezed out of the glands during moderate laughter or smiling
may aid in giving them lustre; though this must be of altogether
subordinate importance, as they become dull from grief, though they
are then often moist. Their brightness seems to be chiefly due to their
tenseness,[813] owing to the contraction of the orbicular muscles and
to the pressure of the raised cheeks. But, according to Dr. Piderit,
who has discussed this point more fully than any other writer,[814] the
tenseness may be largely attributed to the eyeballs becoming filled
with blood and other fluids, from the acceleration of the circulation,
consequent on the excitement of pleasure. He remarks on the contrast in
the appearance of the eyes of a hectic patient with a rapid circulation,
and of a man suffering from cholera with almost all the fluids of his
body drained from him. Any cause which lowers the circulation deadens
the eye. I remember seeing a man utterly prostrated by prolonged and
severe exertion during a very hot day, and a bystander compared his eyes
to those of a boiled codfish.

To return to the sounds produced during laughter. We can see in a vague
manner how the utterance of sounds of some kind would naturally become
associated with a pleasurable state of mind; for throughout a large part
of the animal kingdom vocal or instrumental sounds are employed either
as a call or as a charm by one sex for the other. They are also
employed as the means for a joyful meeting between the parents and
their offspring, and between the attached members of the same social
community. But why the sounds which man utters when he is pleased
have the peculiar reiterated character of laughter we do not know.
Nevertheless we can see that they would naturally be as different as
possible from the screams or cries of distress; and as in the production
of the latter, the expirations are prolonged and continuous, with
the inspirations short and interrupted, so it might perhaps have been
expected with the sounds uttered from joy, that the expirations would
have been short and broken with the inspirations prolonged; and this is
the case.

It is an equally obscure point why the corners of the mouth are
retracted and the upper lip raised during ordinary laughter. The mouth
must not be opened to its utmost extent, for when this occurs during
a paroxysm of excessive laughter hardly any sound is emitted; or it
changes its tone and seems to come from deep down in the throat. The
respiratory muscles, and even those of the limbs, are at the same time
thrown into rapid vibratory movements. The lower jaw often partakes
of this movement, and this would tend to prevent the mouth from being
widely opened. But as a full volume of sound has to be poured forth, the
orifice of the mouth must be large; and it is perhaps to gain this end
that the corners are retracted and the upper lip raised. Although we can
hardly account for the shape of the mouth during laughter, which
leads to wrinkles being formed beneath the eyes, nor for the peculiar
reiterated sound of laughter, nor for the quivering of the jaws,
nevertheless we may infer that all these effects are due to some common
cause. For they are all characteristic and expressive of a pleased state
of mind in various kinds of monkeys.

A graduated series can be followed from violent to moderate laughter,
to a broad smile, to a gentle smile, and to the expression of mere
cheerfulness. During excessive laughter the whole body is often thrown
backward and shakes, or is almost convulsed; the respiration is much
disturbed; the head and face become gorged with blood, with the veins
distended; and the orbicular muscles are spasmodically contracted in
order to protect the eyes. Tears are freely shed. Hence, as formerly
remarked, it is scarcely possible to point out any difference between
the tear-stained face of a person after a paroxysm of excessive laughter
and after a bitter crying-fit.[815] It is probably due to the close
similarity of the spasmodic movements caused by these widely different
emotions that hysteric patients alternately cry and laugh with violence,
and that young children sometimes pass suddenly from the one to the
other state. Mr. Swinhoe informs me that he has often seen the Chinese,
when suffering from deep grief, burst out into hysterical fits of
laughter.

I was anxious to know whether tears are freely shed during excessive
laughter by most of the races of men, and I hear from my correspondents
that this is the case. One instance was observed with the Hindoos, and
they themselves said that it often occurred. So it is with the Chinese.
The women of a wild tribe of Malays in the Malacca peninsula, sometimes
shed tears when they laugh heartily, though this seldom occurs. With the
Dyaks of Borneo it must frequently be the case, at least with the women,
for I hear from the Rajah C. Brooke that it is a common expression with
them to say "we nearly made tears from laughter." The aborigines of
Australia express their emotions freely, and they are described by my
correspondents as jumping about and clapping their hands for joy, and as
often roaring with laughter. No less than four observers have seen their
eyes freely watering on such occasions; and in one instance the tears
rolled down their cheeks. Mr. Bulmer, a missionary in a remote part of
Victoria, remarks, "that they have a keen sense of the ridiculous;
they are excellent mimics, and when one of them is able to imitate the
peculiarities of some absent member of the tribe, it is very common to
hear all in the camp convulsed with laughter." With Europeans hardly
anything excites laughter so easily as mimicry; and it is rather curious
to find the same fact with the savages of Australia, who constitute one
of the most distinct races in the world.

In Southern Africa with two tribes of Kafirs, especially with the women,
their eyes often fill with tears during laughter. Gaika, the brother of
the chief Sandilli, answers my query on this bead, with the words, "Yes,
that is their common practice." Sir Andrew Smith has seen the painted
face of a Hottentot woman all furrowed with tears after a fit of
laughter. In Northern Africa, with the Abyssinians, tears are secreted
under the same circumstances. Lastly, in North America, the same fact
has been observed in a remarkably savage and isolated tribe, but chiefly
with the women; in another tribe it was observed only on a single
occasion.

Excessive laughter, as before remarked, graduates into moderate
laughter. In this latter case the muscles round the eyes are much less
contracted, and there is little or no frowning. Between a gentle laugh
and a broad smile there is hardly any difference, excepting that in
smiling no reiterated sound is uttered, though a single rather strong
expiration, or slight noise--a rudiment of a laugh--may often be heard
at the commencement of a smile. On a moderately smiling countenance the
contraction of the upper orbicular muscles can still just be traced by a
slight lowering of the eyebrows. The contraction of the lower orbicular
and palpebral muscles is much plainer, and is shown by the wrinkling of
the lower eyelids and of the skin beneath them, together with a slight
drawing up of the upper lip. From the broadest smile we pass by the
finest steps into the gentlest one. In this latter case the features are
moved in a much less degree, and much more slowly, and the mouth is
kept closed. The curvature of the naso-labial furrow is also slightly
different in the two cases. We thus see that no abrupt line of
demarcation can be drawn between the movement of the features during the
most violent laughter and a very faint smile.[816]

A smile, therefore, may be said to be the first stage in the development
of a laugh. But a different and more probable view may be suggested;
namely, that the habit of uttering load reiterated sounds from a sense
of pleasure, first led to the retraction of the corners of the mouth and
of the upper lip, and to the contraction of the orbicular muscles; and
that now, through association and long-continued habit, the same muscles
are brought into slight play whenever any cause excites in us a feeling
which, if stronger, would have led to laughter; and the result is a
smile.

Whether we look at laughter as the full development of a smile, or, as
is more probable, at a gentle smile as the last trace of a habit, firmly
fixed during many generations, of laughing whenever we are joyful, we
can follow in our infants the gradual passage of the one into the other.
It is well known to those who have the charge of young infants, that it
is difficult to feel sure when certain movements about their mouths are
really expressive; that is, when they really smile. Hence I carefully
watched my own infants. One of them at the age of forty-five days, and
being at the time in a happy frame of mind, smiled; that is, the
corners of the mouth were retracted, and simultaneously the eyes became
decidedly bright. I observed the same thing on the following day; but on
the third day the child was not quite well and there was no trace of a
smile, and this renders it probable that the previous smiles were real.
Eight days subsequently and during the next succeeding week, it was
remarkable how his eyes brightened whenever he smiled, and his nose
became at the same time transversely wrinkled. This was now accompanied
by a little bleating noise, which perhaps represented a laugh. At the
age of 113 days these little noises, which were always made during
expiration, assumed a slightly different character, and were more
broken or interrupted, as in sobbing; and this was certainly incipient
laughter. The change in tone seemed to me at the time to be connected
with the greater lateral extension of the mouth as the smiles became
broader.

In a second infant the first real smile was observed at about the same
age, viz. forty-five days; and in a third, at a somewhat earlier age.
The second infant, when sixty-five days old, smiled much more broadly
and plainly than did the one first mentioned at the same age; and even
at this early age uttered noises very like laughter. In this gradual
acquirement, by infants, of the habit of laughing, we have a case in
some degree analogous to that of weeping. As practice is requisite with
the ordinary movements of the body, such as walking, so it seems to be
with laughing and weeping. The art of screaming, on the other hand,
from being of service to infants, has become finely developed from the
earliest days.


_High spirits, cheerfulness_.--A man in high spirits, though he may not
actually smile, commonly exhibits some tendency to the retraction of the
corners of his mouth. From the excitement of pleasure, the circulation
becomes more rapid; the eyes are bright, and the colour of the face
rises. The brain, being stimulated by the increased flow of blood,
reacts on the mental powers; lively ideas pass still more rapidly
through the mind, and the affections are warmed. I heard a child, a
little under four years old, when asked what was meant by being in good
spirits, answer, "It is laughing, talking, and kissing." It would be
difficult to give a truer and more practical definition. A man in this
state holds his body erect, his head upright, and his eyes open. There
is no drooping of the features, and no contraction of the eyebrows.
On the contrary, the frontal muscle, as Moreau observes,[817] tends to
contract slightly; and this smooths the brow, removes every trace of a
frown, arches the eyebrows a little, and raises the eyelids. Hence the
Latin phrase, _exporrigere frontem_--to unwrinkle the brow--means, to
be cheerful or merry. The whole expression of a man in good spirits is
exactly the opposite of that of one suffering from sorrow. According to
Sir C. Bell, "In all the exhilarating emotions the eyebrows, eyelids,
the nostrils, and the angles of the mouth are raised. In the depressing
passions it is the reverse." Under the influence of the latter the brow
is heavy, the eyelids, cheeks, mouth, and whole head droop; the eyes are
dull; the countenance pallid, and the respiration slow. In joy the face
expands, in grief it lengthens. Whether the principle of antithesis has
here come into play in producing these opposite expressions, in aid of
the direct causes which have been specified and which are sufficiently
plain, I will not pretend to say.

With all the races of man the expression of good spirit appears to be
the same, and is easily recognized. My informants, from various parts of
the Old and New Worlds, answer in the affirmative to my queries on this
head, and they give some particulars with respect to Hindoos, Malays,
and New Zealanders. The brightness of the eyes of the Australians has
struck four observers, and the same fact has been noticed with Hindoos,
New Zealanders, and the Dyaks of Borneo.

Savages sometimes express their satisfaction not only by smiling, but
by gestures derived from the pleasure of eating. Thus Mr. Wedgwood[818]
quotes Petherick that the negroes on the Upper Nile began a general
rubbing of their bellies when he displayed his beads; and Leichhardt
says that the Australians smacked and clacked their mouths at the sight
of his horses and bullocks, and more especially of his kangaroo dogs.
The Greenlanders, "when they affirm anything with pleasure, suck down
air with a certain sound;"[819] and this may be an imitation of the act
of swallowing savoury food.

Laughter is suppressed by the firm contraction of the orbicular muscles
of the mouth, which prevents the great zygomatic and other muscles from
drawing the lips backwards and upwards. The lower lip is also sometimes
held by the teeth, and this gives a roguish expression to the face,
as was observed with the blind and deaf Laura Bridgman.[820] The great
zygomatic muscle is sometimes variable in its course, and I have seen
a young woman in whom the _depressores anguli oris_ were brought into
strong action in suppressing a smile; but this by no means gave to her
countenance a melancholy expression, owing to the brightness of her
eyes.

Laughter is frequently employed in a forced manner to conceal or mask
some other state of mind, even anger. We often see persons laughing in
order to conceal their shame or shyness. When a person purses up his
mouth, as if to prevent the possibility of a smile, though there is
nothing to excite one, or nothing to prevent its free indulgence, an
affected, solemn, or pedantic expression is given; but of such hybrid
expressions nothing more need here be said. In the case of derision, a
real or pretended smile or laugh is often blended with the expression
proper to contempt, and this may pass into angry contempt or scorn. In
such cases the meaning of the laugh or smile is to show the offending
person that he excites only amusement.

_Love, tender feelings, &c_.--Although the emotion of love, for instance
that of a mother for her infant, is one of the strongest of which the
mind is capable, it can hardly be said to have any proper or peculiar
means of expression; and this is intelligible, as it has not habitually
led to any special line of action. No doubt, as affection is a
pleasurable sensation, it generally causes a gentle smile and some
brightening of the eyes. A strong desire to touch the beloved person is
commonly felt; and love is expressed by this means more plainly than
by any other.[821] Hence we long to clasp in our arms those whom we
tenderly love. We probably owe this desire to inherited habit, in
association with the nursing and tending of our children, and with the
mutual caresses of lovers.

With the lower animals we see the same principle of pleasure derived
from contact in association with love. Dogs and cats manifestly take
pleasure in rubbing against their masters and mistresses, and in being
rubbed or patted by them. Many kinds of monkeys, as I am assured by the
keepers in the Zoological Gardens, delight in fondling and being fondled
by each other, and by persons to whom they are attached. Mr. Bartlett
has described to me the behaviour of two chimpanzees, rather older
animals than those generally imported into this country, when they were
first brought together. They sat opposite, touching each other with
their much protruded lips; and the one put his hand on the shoulder
of the other. They then mutually folded each other in their arms.
Afterwards they stood up, each with one arm on the shoulder of the
other, lifted up their heads, opened their mouths, and yelled with
delight.

We Europeans are so accustomed to kissing as a mark of affection, that
it might be thought to be innate in mankind; but this is not the case.
Steele was mistaken when he said "Nature was its author, and it began
with the first courtship." Jemmy Button, the Fuegian, told me that this
practice was unknown in his land. It is equally unknown with the New
Zealanders, Tahitians, Papuans, Australians, Somals of Africa, and
the Esquimaux. But it is so far innate or natural that it apparently
depends on pleasure from close contact with a beloved person; and it is
replaced in various parts of the world, by the rubbing of noses, as
with the New Zealanders and Laplanders, by the rubbing or patting of the
arms, breasts, or stomachs, or by one man striking his own face with the
hands or feet of another. Perhaps the practice of blowing, as a mark
of affection, on various parts of the body may depend on the same
principle.[823]

The feelings which are called tender are difficult to analyse; they seem
to be compounded of affection, joy, and especially of sympathy. These
feelings are in themselves of a pleasurable nature, excepting when pity
is too deep, or horror is aroused, as in hearing of a tortured man or
animal. They are remarkable under our present point of view from so
readily exciting the secretion of tears. Many a father and son have wept
on meeting after a long separation, especially if the meeting has been
unexpected. No doubt extreme joy by itself tends to act on the lacrymal
glands; but on such occasions as the foregoing vague thoughts of the
grief which would have been felt had the father and son never met, will
probably have passed through their minds; and grief naturally leads to
the secretion of tears. Thus on the return of Ulysses:--

    "Telemachus Rose, and clung weeping round his father's breast.
     There the pent grief rained o'er them, yearning thus.
     *   *    *    *    *    *
     Thus piteously they wailed in sore unrest,
     And on their weepings had gone down the day,
     But that at last Telemachus found words to say."
    _Worsley's Translation of the Odyssey_, Book xvi. st. 27.

So again when Penelope at last recognized her husband:--

     "Then from her eyelids the quick tears did start
     And she ran to him from her place, and threw
     Her arms about his neck, and a warm dew
     Of kisses poured upon him, and thus spake:"
     --Book xxiii.  st.  27.


The vivid recollection of our former home, or of long-past happy days,
readily causes the eyes to be suffused with tears; but here, again,
the thought naturally occurs that these days will never return. In such
cases we may be said to sympathize with ourselves in our present, in
comparison with our former, state. Sympathy with the distresses of
others, even with the imaginary distresses of a heroine in a pathetic
story, for whom we feel no affection, readily excites tears. So does
sympathy with the happiness of others, as with that of a lover, at last
successful after many hard trials in a well-told tale.

Sympathy appears to constitute a separate or distinct emotion; and it is
especially apt to excite the lacrymal glands. This holds good whether
we give or receive sympathy. Every one must have noticed how readily
children burst out crying if we pity them for some small hurt. With the
melancholic insane, as Dr. Crichton Browne informs me, a kind word will
often plunge them into unrestrained weeping. As soon as we express our
pity for the grief of a friend, tears often come into our own eyes. The
feeling of sympathy is commonly explained by assuming that, when we see
or hear of suffering in another, the idea of suffering is called up so
vividly in our own minds that we ourselves suffer. But this explanation
is hardly sufficient, for it does not account for the intimate alliance
between sympathy and affection. We undoubtedly sympathize far more
deeply with a beloved than with an indifferent person; and the sympathy
of the one gives us far more relief than that of the other. Yet
assuredly we can sympathize with those for whom we feel no affection.

Why suffering, when actually experienced by ourselves, excites weeping,
has been discussed in a former chapter. With respect to joy, its natural
and universal expression is laughter; and with all the races of man loud
laughter leads to the secretion of tears more freely than does any other
cause excepting distress. The suffusion of the eyes with tears, which
undoubtedly occurs under great joy, though there is no laughter, can, as
it seems to me, be explained through habit and association on the same
principles as the effusion of tears from grief, although there is no
screaming. Nevertheless it is not a little remarkable that sympathy with
the distresses of others should excite tears more freely than our own
distress; and this certainly is the case. Many a man, from whose eyes
no suffering of his own could wring a tear, has shed tears at the
sufferings of a beloved friend. It is still more remarkable that
sympathy with the happiness or good fortune of those whom we tenderly
love should lead to the same result, whilst a similar happiness felt
by ourselves would leave our eyes dry. We should, however, bear in
mind that the long-continued habit of restraint which is so powerful in
checking the free flow of tears from bodily pain, has not been brought
into play in preventing a moderate effusion of tears in sympathy with
the sufferings or happiness of others.

Music has a wonderful power, as I have elsewhere attempted to show,[824]
of recalling in a vague and indefinite manner, those strong emotions
which were felt during long-past ages, when, as is probable, our early
progenitors courted each other by the aid of vocal tones. And as several
of our strongest emotions--grief, great joy, love, and sympathy--lead to
the free secretion of tears, it is not surprising that music should be
apt to cause our eyes to become suffused with tears, especially when
we are already softened by any of the tenderer feelings. Music often
produces another peculiar effect. We know that every strong sensation,
emotion, or excitement--extreme pain, rage, terror, joy, or the passion
of love--all have a special tendency to cause the muscles to tremble;
and the thrill or slight shiver which runs down the backbone and limbs
of many persons when they are powerfully affected by music, seems to
bear the same relation to the above trembling of the body, as a slight
suffusion of tears from the power of music does to weeping from any
strong and real emotion.

_Devotion_.--As devotion is, in some degree, related to affection,
though mainly consisting of reverence, often combined with fear, the
expression of this state of mind may here be briefly noticed. With some
sects, both past and present, religion and love have been strangely
combined; and it has even been maintained, lamentable as the fact may
be, that the holy kiss of love differs but little from that which a
man bestows on a woman, or a woman on a man.[825] Devotion is chiefly
expressed by the face being directed towards the heavens, with the
eyeballs upturned. Sir C. Bell remarks that, at the approach of sleep,
or of a fainting-fit, or of death, the pupils are drawn upwards and
inwards; and he believes that "when we are wrapt in devotional feelings,
and outward impressions are unheeded, the eyes are raised by an action
neither taught nor acquired." and that this is due to the same cause as
in the above cases.[826] That the eyes are upturned during sleep is,
as I hear from Professor Donders, certain. With babies, whilst sucking
their mother's breast, this movement of the eyeballs often gives to them
an absurd appearance of ecstatic delight; and here it may be clearly
perceived that a struggle is going on against the position naturally
assumed during sleep. But Sir C. Bell's explanation of the fact, which
rests on the assumption that certain muscles are more under the control
of the will than others is, as I hear from Professor Donders, incorrect.
As the eyes are often turned up in prayer, without the mind being so
much absorbed in thought as to approach to the unconsciousness of sleep,
the movement is probably a conventional one--the result of the common
belief that Heaven, the source of Divine power to which we pray, is
seated above us.

A humble kneeling posture, with the hands upturned and palms joined,
appears to us, from long habit, a gesture so appropriate to devotion,
that it might be thought to be innate; but I have not met with any
evidence to this effect with the various extra-European races of
mankind. During the classical period of Roman history it does not
appear, as I hear from an excellent classic, that the hands were thus
joined during prayer. Mr. Rensleigh Wedgwood has apparently given[827]
the true explanation, though this implies that the attitude is one of
slavish subjection. "When the suppliant kneels and holds up his
hands with the palms joined, he represents a captive who proves the
completeness of his submission by offering up his hands to be bound
by the victor. It is the pictorial representation of the Latin _dare
manus_, to signify submission." Hence it is not probable that either
the uplifting of the eyes or the joining of the open hands, under
the influence of devotional feelings, are innate or truly expressive
actions; and this could hardly have been expected, for it is very
doubtful whether feelings, such as we should now rank as devotional,
affected the hearts of men, whilst they remained during past ages in an
uncivilized condition.

